the project gutenberg ebook of the wonderful wizard of oz this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook. title: the wonderful wizard of oz author: l. frank baum release date: february 1, 1993 [ebook #55] most recently updated: december 29, 2024 language: english *** start of the project gutenberg ebook the wonderful wizard of oz *** [illustration] the wonderful wizard of oz by l. frank baum this book is dedicated to my good friend & comrade my wife l.f.b. contents introduction chapter i. the cyclone chapter ii. the council with the munchkins chapter iii. how dorothy saved the scarecrow chapter iv. the road through the forest chapter v. the rescue of the tin woodman chapter vi. the cowardly lion chapter vii. the journey to the great oz chapter viii. the deadly poppy field chapter ix. the queen of the field mice chapter x. the guardian of the gates chapter xi. the emerald city of oz chapter xii. the search for the wicked witch chapter xiii. the rescue chapter xiv. the winged monkeys chapter xv. the discovery of oz, the terrible chapter xvi. the magic art of the great humbug chapter xvii. how the balloon was launched chapter xviii. away to the south chapter xix. attacked by the fighting trees chapter xx. the dainty china country chapter xxi. the lion becomes the king of beasts chapter xxii. the country of the quadlings chapter xxiii. glinda the good witch grants dorothy’s wish chapter xxiv. home again introduction folklore, legends, myths and fairy tales have followed childhood through the ages, for every healthy youngster has a wholesome and instinctive love for stories fantastic, marvelous and manifestly unreal. the winged fairies of grimm and andersen have brought more happiness to childish hearts than all other human creations. yet the old time fairy tale, having served for generations, may now be classed as “historical” in the children’s library; for the time has come for a series of newer “wonder tales” in which the stereotyped genie, dwarf and fairy are eliminated, together with all the horrible and blood-curdling incidents devised by their authors to point a fearsome moral to each tale. modern education includes morality; therefore the modern child seeks only entertainment in its wonder tales and gladly dispenses with all disagreeable incident. having this thought in mind, the story of “the wonderful wizard of oz” was written solely to please children of today. it aspires to being a modernized fairy tale, in which the wonderment and joy are retained and the heartaches and nightmares are left out. l. frank baum chicago, april, 1900. the wonderful wizard of oz chapter i the cyclone dorothy lived in the midst of the great kansas prairies, with uncle henry, who was a farmer, and aunt em, who was the farmer’s wife. their house was small, for the lumber to build it had to be carried by wagon many miles. there were four walls, a floor and a roof, which made one room; and this room contained a rusty looking cookstove, a cupboard for the dishes, a table, three or four chairs, and the beds. uncle henry and aunt em had a big bed in one corner, and dorothy a little bed in another corner. there was no garret at all, and no cellar—except a small hole dug in the ground, called a cyclone cellar, where the family could go in case one of those great whirlwinds arose, mighty enough to crush any building in its path. it was reached by a trap door in the middle of the floor, from which a ladder led down into the small, dark hole. when dorothy stood in the doorway and looked around, she could see nothing but the great gray prairie on every side. not a tree nor a house broke the broad sweep of flat country that reached to the edge of the sky in all directions. the sun had baked the plowed land into a gray mass, with little cracks running through it. even the grass was not green, for the sun had burned the tops of the long blades until they were the same gray color to be seen everywhere. once the house had been painted, but the sun blistered the paint and the rains washed it away, and now the house was as dull and gray as everything else. when aunt em came there to live she was a young, pretty wife. the sun and wind had changed her, too. they had taken the sparkle from her eyes and left them a sober gray; they had taken the red from her cheeks and lips, and they were gray also. she was thin and gaunt, and never smiled now. when dorothy, who was an orphan, first came to her, aunt em had been so startled by the child’s laughter that she would scream and press her hand upon her heart whenever dorothy’s merry voice reached her ears; and she still looked at the little girl with wonder that she could find anything to laugh at. uncle henry never laughed. he worked hard from morning till night and did not know what joy was. he was gray also, from his long beard to his rough boots, and he looked stern and solemn, and rarely spoke. it was toto that made dorothy laugh, and saved her from growing as gray as her other surroundings. toto was not gray; he was a little black dog, with long silky hair and small black eyes that twinkled merrily on either side of his funny, wee nose. toto played all day long, and dorothy played with him, and loved him dearly. today, however, they were not playing. uncle henry sat upon the doorstep and looked anxiously at the sky, which was even grayer than usual. dorothy stood in the door with toto in her arms, and looked at the sky too. aunt em was washing the dishes. from the far north they heard a low wail of the wind, and uncle henry and dorothy could see where the long grass bowed in waves before the coming storm. there now came a sharp whistling in the air from the south, and as they turned their eyes that way they saw ripples in the grass coming from that direction also. suddenly uncle henry stood up. “there’s a cyclone coming, em,” he called to his wife. “i’ll go look after the stock.” then he ran toward the sheds where the cows and horses were kept. aunt em dropped her work and came to the door. one glance told her of the danger close at hand. “quick, dorothy!” she screamed. “run for the cellar!” toto jumped out of dorothy’s arms and hid under the bed, and the girl started to get him. aunt em, badly frightened, threw open the trap door in the floor and climbed down the ladder into the small, dark hole. dorothy caught toto at last and started to follow her aunt. when she was halfway across the room there came a great shriek from the wind, and the house shook so hard that she lost her footing and sat down suddenly upon the floor. then a strange thing happened. the house whirled around two or three times and rose slowly through the air. dorothy felt as if she were going up in a balloon. the north and south winds met where the house stood, and made it the exact center of the cyclone. in the middle of a cyclone the air is generally still, but the great pressure of the wind on every side of the house raised it up higher and higher, until it was at the very top of the cyclone; and there it remained and was carried miles and miles away as easily as you could carry a feather. it was very dark, and the wind howled horribly around her, but dorothy found she was riding quite easily. after the first few whirls around, and one other time when the house tipped badly, she felt as if she were being rocked gently, like a baby in a cradle. toto did not like it. he ran about the room, now here, now there, barking loudly; but dorothy sat quite still on the floor and waited to see what would happen. once toto got too near the open trap door, and fell in; and at first the little girl thought she had lost him. but soon she saw one of his ears sticking up through the hole, for the strong pressure of the air was keeping him up so that he could not fall. she crept to the hole, caught toto by the ear, and dragged him into the room again, afterward closing the trap door so that no more accidents could happen. hour after hour passed away, and slowly dorothy got over her fright; but she felt quite lonely, and the wind shrieked so loudly all about her that she nearly became deaf. at first she had wondered if she would be dashed to pieces when the house fell again; but as the hours passed and nothing terrible happened, she stopped worrying and resolved to wait calmly and see what the future would bring. at last she crawled over the swaying floor to her bed, and lay down upon it; and toto followed and lay down beside her. in spite of the swaying of the house and the wailing of the wind, dorothy soon closed her eyes and fell fast asleep. chapter ii the council with the munchkins she was awakened by a shock, so sudden and severe that if dorothy had not been lying on the soft bed she might have been hurt. as it was, the jar made her catch her breath and wonder what had happened; and toto put his cold little nose into her face and whined dismally. dorothy sat up and noticed that the house was not moving; nor was it dark, for the bright sunshine came in at the window, flooding the little room. she sprang from her bed and with toto at her heels ran and opened the door. the little girl gave a cry of amazement and looked about her, her eyes growing bigger and bigger at the wonderful sights she saw. the cyclone had set the house down very gently—for a cyclone—in the midst of a country of marvelous beauty. there were lovely patches of greensward all about, with stately trees bearing rich and luscious fruits. banks of gorgeous flowers were on every hand, and birds with rare and brilliant plumage sang and fluttered in the trees and bushes. a little way off was a small brook, rushing and sparkling along between green banks, and murmuring in a voice very grateful to a little girl who had lived so long on the dry, gray prairies. while she stood looking eagerly at the strange and beautiful sights, she noticed coming toward her a group of the queerest people she had ever seen. they were not as big as the grown folk she had always been used to; but neither were they very small. in fact, they seemed about as tall as dorothy, who was a well-grown child for her age, although they were, so far as looks go, many years older. three were men and one a woman, and all were oddly dressed. they wore round hats that rose to a small point a foot above their heads, with little bells around the brims that tinkled sweetly as they moved. the hats of the men were blue; the little woman’s hat was white, and she wore a white gown that hung in pleats from her shoulders. over it were sprinkled little stars that glistened in the sun like diamonds. the men were dressed in blue, of the same shade as their hats, and wore well-polished boots with a deep roll of blue at the tops. the men, dorothy thought, were about as old as uncle henry, for two of them had beards. but the little woman was doubtless much older. her face was covered with wrinkles, her hair was nearly white, and she walked rather stiffly. when these people drew near the house where dorothy was standing in the doorway, they paused and whispered among themselves, as if afraid to come farther. but the little old woman walked up to dorothy, made a low bow and said, in a sweet voice: “you are welcome, most noble sorceress, to the land of the munchkins. we are so grateful to you for having killed the wicked witch of the east, and for setting our people free from bondage.” dorothy listened to this speech with wonder. what could the little woman possibly mean by calling her a sorceress, and saying she had killed the wicked witch of the east? dorothy was an innocent, harmless little girl, who had been carried by a cyclone many miles from home; and she had never killed anything in all her life. but the little woman evidently expected her to answer; so dorothy said, with hesitation, “you are very kind, but there must be some mistake. i have not killed anything.” “your house did, anyway,” replied the little old woman, with a laugh, “and that is the same thing. see!” she continued, pointing to the corner of the house. “there are her two feet, still sticking out from under a block of wood.” dorothy looked, and gave a little cry of fright. there, indeed, just under the corner of the great beam the house rested on, two feet were sticking out, shod in silver shoes with pointed toes. “oh, dear! oh, dear!” cried dorothy, clasping her hands together in dismay. “the house must have fallen on her. whatever shall we do?” “there is nothing to be done,” said the little woman calmly. “but who was she?” asked dorothy. “she was the wicked witch of the east, as i said,” answered the little woman. “she has held all the munchkins in bondage for many years, making them slave for her night and day. now they are all set free, and are grateful to you for the favor.” “who are the munchkins?” inquired dorothy. “they are the people who live in this land of the east where the wicked witch ruled.” “are you a munchkin?” asked dorothy. “no, but i am their friend, although i live in the land of the north. when they saw the witch of the east was dead the munchkins sent a swift messenger to me, and i came at once. i am the witch of the north.” “oh, gracious!” cried dorothy. “are you a real witch?” “yes, indeed,” answered the little woman. “but i am a good witch, and the people love me. i am not as powerful as the wicked witch was who ruled here, or i should have set the people free myself.” “but i thought all witches were wicked,” said the girl, who was half frightened at facing a real witch. “oh, no, that is a great mistake. there were only four witches in all the land of oz, and two of them, those who live in the north and the south, are good witches. i know this is true, for i am one of them myself, and cannot be mistaken. those who dwelt in the east and the west were, indeed, wicked witches; but now that you have killed one of them, there is but one wicked witch in all the land of oz—the one who lives in the west.” “but,” said dorothy, after a moment’s thought, “aunt em has told me that the witches were all dead—years and years ago.” “who is aunt em?” inquired the little old woman. “she is my aunt who lives in kansas, where i came from.” the witch of the north seemed to think for a time, with her head bowed and her eyes upon the ground. then she looked up and said, “i do not know where kansas is, for i have never heard that country mentioned before. but tell me, is it a civilized country?” “oh, yes,” replied dorothy. “then that accounts for it. in the civilized countries i believe there are no witches left, nor wizards, nor sorceresses, nor magicians. but, you see, the land of oz has never been civilized, for we are cut off from all the rest of the world. therefore we still have witches and wizards amongst us.” “who are the wizards?” asked dorothy. “oz himself is the great wizard,” answered the witch, sinking her voice to a whisper. “he is more powerful than all the rest of us together. he lives in the city of emeralds.” dorothy was going to ask another question, but just then the munchkins, who had been standing silently by, gave a loud shout and pointed to the corner of the house where the wicked witch had been lying. “what is it?” asked the little old woman, and looked, and began to laugh. the feet of the dead witch had disappeared entirely, and nothing was left but the silver shoes. “she was so old,” explained the witch of the north, “that she dried up quickly in the sun. that is the end of her. but the silver shoes are yours, and you shall have them to wear.” she reached down and picked up the shoes, and after shaking the dust out of them handed them to dorothy. “the witch of the east was proud of those silver shoes,” said one of the munchkins, “and there is some charm connected with them; but what it is we never knew.” dorothy carried the shoes into the house and placed them on the table. then she came out again to the munchkins and said: “i am anxious to get back to my aunt and uncle, for i am sure they will worry about me. can you help me find my way?” the munchkins and the witch first looked at one another, and then at dorothy, and then shook their heads. “at the east, not far from here,” said one, “there is a great desert, and none could live to cross it.” “it is the same at the south,” said another, “for i have been there and seen it. the south is the country of the quadlings.” “i am told,” said the third man, “that it is the same at the west. and that country, where the winkies live, is ruled by the wicked witch of the west, who would make you her slave if you passed her way.” “the north is my home,” said the old lady, “and at its edge is the same great desert that surrounds this land of oz. i’m afraid, my dear, you will have to live with us.” dorothy began to sob at this, for she felt lonely among all these strange people. her tears seemed to grieve the kind-hearted munchkins, for they immediately took out their handkerchiefs and began to weep also. as for the little old woman, she took off her cap and balanced the point on the end of her nose, while she counted “one, two, three” in a solemn voice. at once the cap changed to a slate, on which was written in big, white chalk marks: “let dorothy go to the city of emeralds” the little old woman took the slate from her nose, and having read the words on it, asked, “is your name dorothy, my dear?” “yes,” answered the child, looking up and drying her tears. “then you must go to the city of emeralds. perhaps oz will help you.” “where is this city?” asked dorothy. “it is exactly in the center of the country, and is ruled by oz, the great wizard i told you of.” “is he a good man?” inquired the girl anxiously. “he is a good wizard. whether he is a man or not i cannot tell, for i have never seen him.” “how can i get there?” asked dorothy. “you must walk. it is a long journey, through a country that is sometimes pleasant and sometimes dark and terrible. however, i will use all the magic arts i know of to keep you from harm.” “won’t you go with me?” pleaded the girl, who had begun to look upon the little old woman as her only friend. “no, i cannot do that,” she replied, “but i will give you my kiss, and no one will dare injure a person who has been kissed by the witch of the north.” she came close to dorothy and kissed her gently on the forehead. where her lips touched the girl they left a round, shining mark, as dorothy found out soon after. “the road to the city of emeralds is paved with yellow brick,” said the witch, “so you cannot miss it. when you get to oz do not be afraid of him, but tell your story and ask him to help you. good-bye, my dear.” the three munchkins bowed low to her and wished her a pleasant journey, after which they walked away through the trees. the witch gave dorothy a friendly little nod, whirled around on her left heel three times, and straightway disappeared, much to the surprise of little toto, who barked after her loudly enough when she had gone, because he had been afraid even to growl while she stood by. but dorothy, knowing her to be a witch, had expected her to disappear in just that way, and was not surprised in the least. chapter iii how dorothy saved the scarecrow when dorothy was left alone she began to feel hungry. so she went to the cupboard and cut herself some bread, which she spread with butter. she gave some to toto, and taking a pail from the shelf she carried it down to the little brook and filled it with clear, sparkling water. toto ran over to the trees and began to bark at the birds sitting there. dorothy went to get him, and saw such delicious fruit hanging from the branches that she gathered some of it, finding it just what she wanted to help out her breakfast. then she went back to the house, and having helped herself and toto to a good drink of the cool, clear water, she set about making ready for the journey to the city of emeralds. dorothy had only one other dress, but that happened to be clean and was hanging on a peg beside her bed. it was gingham, with checks of white and blue; and although the blue was somewhat faded with many washings, it was still a pretty frock. the girl washed herself carefully, dressed herself in the clean gingham, and tied her pink sunbonnet on her head. she took a little basket and filled it with bread from the cupboard, laying a white cloth over the top. then she looked down at her feet and noticed how old and worn her shoes were. “they surely will never do for a long journey, toto,” she said. and toto looked up into her face with his little black eyes and wagged his tail to show he knew what she meant. at that moment dorothy saw lying on the table the silver shoes that had belonged to the witch of the east. “i wonder if they will fit me,” she said to toto. “they would be just the thing to take a long walk in, for they could not wear out.” she took off her old leather shoes and tried on the silver ones, which fitted her as well as if they had been made for her. finally she picked up her basket. “come along, toto,” she said. “we will go to the emerald city and ask the great oz how to get back to kansas again.” she closed the door, locked it, and put the key carefully in the pocket of her dress. and so, with toto trotting along soberly behind her, she started on her journey. there were several roads nearby, but it did not take her long to find the one paved with yellow bricks. within a short time she was walking briskly toward the emerald city, her silver shoes tinkling merrily on the hard, yellow road-bed. the sun shone bright and the birds sang sweetly, and dorothy did not feel nearly so bad as you might think a little girl would who had been suddenly whisked away from her own country and set down in the midst of a strange land. she was surprised, as she walked along, to see how pretty the country was about her. there were neat fences at the sides of the road, painted a dainty blue color, and beyond them were fields of grain and vegetables in abundance. evidently the munchkins were good farmers and able to raise large crops. once in a while she would pass a house, and the people came out to look at her and bow low as she went by; for everyone knew she had been the means of destroying the wicked witch and setting them free from bondage. the houses of the munchkins were odd-looking dwellings, for each was round, with a big dome for a roof. all were painted blue, for in this country of the east blue was the favorite color. toward evening, when dorothy was tired with her long walk and began to wonder where she should pass the night, she came to a house rather larger than the rest. on the green lawn before it many men and women were dancing. five little fiddlers played as loudly as possible, and the people were laughing and singing, while a big table near by was loaded with delicious fruits and nuts, pies and cakes, and many other good things to eat. the people greeted dorothy kindly, and invited her to supper and to pass the night with them; for this was the home of one of the richest munchkins in the land, and his friends were gathered with him to celebrate their freedom from the bondage of the wicked witch. dorothy ate a hearty supper and was waited upon by the rich munchkin himself, whose name was boq. then she sat upon a settee and watched the people dance. when boq saw her silver shoes he said, “you must be a great sorceress.” “why?” asked the girl. “because you wear silver shoes and have killed the wicked witch. besides, you have white in your frock, and only witches and sorceresses wear white.” “my dress is blue and white checked,” said dorothy, smoothing out the wrinkles in it. “it is kind of you to wear that,” said boq. “blue is the color of the munchkins, and white is the witch color. so we know you are a friendly witch.” dorothy did not know what to say to this, for all the people seemed to think her a witch, and she knew very well she was only an ordinary little girl who had come by the chance of a cyclone into a strange land. when she had tired watching the dancing, boq led her into the house, where he gave her a room with a pretty bed in it. the sheets were made of blue cloth, and dorothy slept soundly in them till morning, with toto curled up on the blue rug beside her. she ate a hearty breakfast, and watched a wee munchkin baby, who played with toto and pulled his tail and crowed and laughed in a way that greatly amused dorothy. toto was a fine curiosity to all the people, for they had never seen a dog before. “how far is it to the emerald city?” the girl asked. “i do not know,” answered boq gravely, “for i have never been there. it is better for people to keep away from oz, unless they have business with him. but it is a long way to the emerald city, and it will take you many days. the country here is rich and pleasant, but you must pass through rough and dangerous places before you reach the end of your journey.” this worried dorothy a little, but she knew that only the great oz could help her get to kansas again, so she bravely resolved not to turn back. she bade her friends good-bye, and again started along the road of yellow brick. when she had gone several miles she thought she would stop to rest, and so climbed to the top of the fence beside the road and sat down. there was a great cornfield beyond the fence, and not far away she saw a scarecrow, placed high on a pole to keep the birds from the ripe corn. dorothy leaned her chin upon her hand and gazed thoughtfully at the scarecrow. its head was a small sack stuffed with straw, with eyes, nose, and mouth painted on it to represent a face. an old, pointed blue hat, that had belonged to some munchkin, was perched on his head, and the rest of the figure was a blue suit of clothes, worn and faded, which had also been stuffed with straw. on the feet were some old boots with blue tops, such as every man wore in this country, and the figure was raised above the stalks of corn by means of the pole stuck up its back. while dorothy was looking earnestly into the queer, painted face of the scarecrow, she was surprised to see one of the eyes slowly wink at her. she thought she must have been mistaken at first, for none of the scarecrows in kansas ever wink; but presently the figure nodded its head to her in a friendly way. then she climbed down from the fence and walked up to it, while toto ran around the pole and barked. “good day,” said the scarecrow, in a rather husky voice. “did you speak?” asked the girl, in wonder. “certainly,” answered the scarecrow. “how do you do?” “i’m pretty well, thank you,” replied dorothy politely. “how do you do?” “i’m not feeling well,” said the scarecrow, with a smile, “for it is very tedious being perched up here night and day to scare away crows.” “can’t you get down?” asked dorothy. “no, for this pole is stuck up my back. if you will please take away the pole i shall be greatly obliged to you.” dorothy reached up both arms and lifted the figure off the pole, for, being stuffed with straw, it was quite light. “thank you very much,” said the scarecrow, when he had been set down on the ground. “i feel like a new man.” dorothy was puzzled at this, for it sounded queer to hear a stuffed man speak, and to see him bow and walk along beside her. “who are you?” asked the scarecrow when he had stretched himself and yawned. “and where are you going?” “my name is dorothy,” said the girl, “and i am going to the emerald city, to ask the great oz to send me back to kansas.” “where is the emerald city?” he inquired. “and who is oz?” “why, don’t you know?” she returned, in surprise. “no, indeed. i don’t know anything. you see, i am stuffed, so i have no brains at all,” he answered sadly. “oh,” said dorothy, “i’m awfully sorry for you.” “do you think,” he asked, “if i go to the emerald city with you, that oz would give me some brains?” “i cannot tell,” she returned, “but you may come with me, if you like. if oz will not give you any brains you will be no worse off than you are now.” “that is true,” said the scarecrow. “you see,” he continued confidentially, “i don’t mind my legs and arms and body being stuffed, because i cannot get hurt. if anyone treads on my toes or sticks a pin into me, it doesn’t matter, for i can’t feel it. but i do not want people to call me a fool, and if my head stays stuffed with straw instead of with brains, as yours is, how am i ever to know anything?” “i understand how you feel,” said the little girl, who was truly sorry for him. “if you will come with me i’ll ask oz to do all he can for you.” “thank you,” he answered gratefully. they walked back to the road. dorothy helped him over the fence, and they started along the path of yellow brick for the emerald city. toto did not like this addition to the party at first. he smelled around the stuffed man as if he suspected there might be a nest of rats in the straw, and he often growled in an unfriendly way at the scarecrow. “don’t mind toto,” said dorothy to her new friend. “he never bites.” “oh, i’m not afraid,” replied the scarecrow. “he can’t hurt the straw. do let me carry that basket for you. i shall not mind it, for i can’t get tired. i’ll tell you a secret,” he continued, as he walked along. “there is only one thing in the world i am afraid of.” “what is that?” asked dorothy; “the munchkin farmer who made you?” “no,” answered the scarecrow; “it’s a lighted match.” chapter iv the road through the forest after a few hours the road began to be rough, and the walking grew so difficult that the scarecrow often stumbled over the yellow bricks, which were here very uneven. sometimes, indeed, they were broken or missing altogether, leaving holes that toto jumped across and dorothy walked around. as for the scarecrow, having no brains, he walked straight ahead, and so stepped into the holes and fell at full length on the hard bricks. it never hurt him, however, and dorothy would pick him up and set him upon his feet again, while he joined her in laughing merrily at his own mishap. the farms were not nearly so well cared for here as they were farther back. there were fewer houses and fewer fruit trees, and the farther they went the more dismal and lonesome the country became. at noon they sat down by the roadside, near a little brook, and dorothy opened her basket and got out some bread. she offered a piece to the scarecrow, but he refused. “i am never hungry,” he said, “and it is a lucky thing i am not, for my mouth is only painted, and if i should cut a hole in it so i could eat, the straw i am stuffed with would come out, and that would spoil the shape of my head.” dorothy saw at once that this was true, so she only nodded and went on eating her bread. “tell me something about yourself and the country you came from,” said the scarecrow, when she had finished her dinner. so she told him all about kansas, and how gray everything was there, and how the cyclone had carried her to this queer land of oz. the scarecrow listened carefully, and said, “i cannot understand why you should wish to leave this beautiful country and go back to the dry, gray place you call kansas.” “that is because you have no brains” answered the girl. “no matter how dreary and gray our homes are, we people of flesh and blood would rather live there than in any other country, be it ever so beautiful. there is no place like home.” the scarecrow sighed. “of course i cannot understand it,” he said. “if your heads were stuffed with straw, like mine, you would probably all live in the beautiful places, and then kansas would have no people at all. it is fortunate for kansas that you have brains.” “won’t you tell me a story, while we are resting?” asked the child. the scarecrow looked at her reproachfully, and answered: “my life has been so short that i really know nothing whatever. i was only made day before yesterday. what happened in the world before that time is all unknown to me. luckily, when the farmer made my head, one of the first things he did was to paint my ears, so that i heard what was going on. there was another munchkin with him, and the first thing i heard was the farmer saying, ‘how do you like those ears?’ “‘they aren’t straight,’” answered the other. “‘never mind,’” said the farmer. “‘they are ears just the same,’” which was true enough. “‘now i’ll make the eyes,’” said the farmer. so he painted my right eye, and as soon as it was finished i found myself looking at him and at everything around me with a great deal of curiosity, for this was my first glimpse of the world. “‘that’s a rather pretty eye,’” remarked the munchkin who was watching the farmer. “‘blue paint is just the color for eyes.’ “‘i think i’ll make the other a little bigger,’” said the farmer. and when the second eye was done i could see much better than before. then he made my nose and my mouth. but i did not speak, because at that time i didn’t know what a mouth was for. i had the fun of watching them make my body and my arms and legs; and when they fastened on my head, at last, i felt very proud, for i thought i was just as good a man as anyone. “‘this fellow will scare the crows fast enough,’ said the farmer. ‘he looks just like a man.’ “‘why, he is a man,’ said the other, and i quite agreed with him. the farmer carried me under his arm to the cornfield, and set me up on a tall stick, where you found me. he and his friend soon after walked away and left me alone. “i did not like to be deserted this way. so i tried to walk after them. but my feet would not touch the ground, and i was forced to stay on that pole. it was a lonely life to lead, for i had nothing to think of, having been made such a little while before. many crows and other birds flew into the cornfield, but as soon as they saw me they flew away again, thinking i was a munchkin; and this pleased me and made me feel that i was quite an important person. by and by an old crow flew near me, and after looking at me carefully he perched upon my shoulder and said: “‘i wonder if that farmer thought to fool me in this clumsy manner. any crow of sense could see that you are only stuffed with straw.’ then he hopped down at my feet and ate all the corn he wanted. the other birds, seeing he was not harmed by me, came to eat the corn too, so in a short time there was a great flock of them about me. “i felt sad at this, for it showed i was not such a good scarecrow after all; but the old crow comforted me, saying, ‘if you only had brains in your head you would be as good a man as any of them, and a better man than some of them. brains are the only things worth having in this world, no matter whether one is a crow or a man.’ “after the crows had gone i thought this over, and decided i would try hard to get some brains. by good luck you came along and pulled me off the stake, and from what you say i am sure the great oz will give me brains as soon as we get to the emerald city.” “i hope so,” said dorothy earnestly, “since you seem anxious to have them.” “oh, yes; i am anxious,” returned the scarecrow. “it is such an uncomfortable feeling to know one is a fool.” “well,” said the girl, “let us go.” and she handed the basket to the scarecrow. there were no fences at all by the roadside now, and the land was rough and untilled. toward evening they came to a great forest, where the trees grew so big and close together that their branches met over the road of yellow brick. it was almost dark under the trees, for the branches shut out the daylight; but the travelers did not stop, and went on into the forest. “if this road goes in, it must come out,” said the scarecrow, “and as the emerald city is at the other end of the road, we must go wherever it leads us.” “anyone would know that,” said dorothy. “certainly; that is why i know it,” returned the scarecrow. “if it required brains to figure it out, i never should have said it.” after an hour or so the light faded away, and they found themselves stumbling along in the darkness. dorothy could not see at all, but toto could, for some dogs see very well in the dark; and the scarecrow declared he could see as well as by day. so she took hold of his arm and managed to get along fairly well. “if you see any house, or any place where we can pass the night,” she said, “you must tell me; for it is very uncomfortable walking in the dark.” soon after the scarecrow stopped. “i see a little cottage at the right of us,” he said, “built of logs and branches. shall we go there?” “yes, indeed,” answered the child. “i am all tired out.” so the scarecrow led her through the trees until they reached the cottage, and dorothy entered and found a bed of dried leaves in one corner. she lay down at once, and with toto beside her soon fell into a sound sleep. the scarecrow, who was never tired, stood up in another corner and waited patiently until morning came. chapter v the rescue of the tin woodman when dorothy awoke the sun was shining through the trees and toto had long been out chasing birds around him and squirrels. she sat up and looked around her. there was the scarecrow, still standing patiently in his corner, waiting for her. “we must go and search for water,” she said to him. “why do you want water?” he asked. “to wash my face clean after the dust of the road, and to drink, so the dry bread will not stick in my throat.” “it must be inconvenient to be made of flesh,” said the scarecrow thoughtfully, “for you must sleep, and eat and drink. however, you have brains, and it is worth a lot of bother to be able to think properly.” they left the cottage and walked through the trees until they found a little spring of clear water, where dorothy drank and bathed and ate her breakfast. she saw there was not much bread left in the basket, and the girl was thankful the scarecrow did not have to eat anything, for there was scarcely enough for herself and toto for the day. when she had finished her meal, and was about to go back to the road of yellow brick, she was startled to hear a deep groan near by. “what was that?” she asked timidly. “i cannot imagine,” replied the scarecrow; “but we can go and see.” just then another groan reached their ears, and the sound seemed to come from behind them. they turned and walked through the forest a few steps, when dorothy discovered something shining in a ray of sunshine that fell between the trees. she ran to the place and then stopped short, with a little cry of surprise. one of the big trees had been partly chopped through, and standing beside it, with an uplifted axe in his hands, was a man made entirely of tin. his head and arms and legs were jointed upon his body, but he stood perfectly motionless, as if he could not stir at all. dorothy looked at him in amazement, and so did the scarecrow, while toto barked sharply and made a snap at the tin legs, which hurt his teeth. “did you groan?” asked dorothy. “yes,” answered the tin man, “i did. i’ve been groaning for more than a year, and no one has ever heard me before or come to help me.” “what can i do for you?” she inquired softly, for she was moved by the sad voice in which the man spoke. “get an oil-can and oil my joints,” he answered. “they are rusted so badly that i cannot move them at all; if i am well oiled i shall soon be all right again. you will find an oil-can on a shelf in my cottage.” dorothy at once ran back to the cottage and found the oil-can, and then she returned and asked anxiously, “where are your joints?” “oil my neck, first,” replied the tin woodman. so she oiled it, and as it was quite badly rusted the scarecrow took hold of the tin head and moved it gently from side to side until it worked freely, and then the man could turn it himself. “now oil the joints in my arms,” he said. and dorothy oiled them and the scarecrow bent them carefully until they were quite free from rust and as good as new. the tin woodman gave a sigh of satisfaction and lowered his axe, which he leaned against the tree. “this is a great comfort,” he said. “i have been holding that axe in the air ever since i rusted, and i’m glad to be able to put it down at last. now, if you will oil the joints of my legs, i shall be all right once more.” so they oiled his legs until he could move them freely; and he thanked them again and again for his release, for he seemed a very polite creature, and very grateful. “i might have stood there always if you had not come along,” he said; “so you have certainly saved my life. how did you happen to be here?” “we are on our way to the emerald city to see the great oz,” she answered, “and we stopped at your cottage to pass the night.” “why do you wish to see oz?” he asked. “i want him to send me back to kansas, and the scarecrow wants him to put a few brains into his head,” she replied. the tin woodman appeared to think deeply for a moment. then he said: “do you suppose oz could give me a heart?” “why, i guess so,” dorothy answered. “it would be as easy as to give the scarecrow brains.” “true,” the tin woodman returned. “so, if you will allow me to join your party, i will also go to the emerald city and ask oz to help me.” “come along,” said the scarecrow heartily, and dorothy added that she would be pleased to have his company. so the tin woodman shouldered his axe and they all passed through the forest until they came to the road that was paved with yellow brick. the tin woodman had asked dorothy to put the oil-can in her basket. “for,” he said, “if i should get caught in the rain, and rust again, i would need the oil-can badly.” it was a bit of good luck to have their new comrade join the party, for soon after they had begun their journey again they came to a place where the trees and branches grew so thick over the road that the travelers could not pass. but the tin woodman set to work with his axe and chopped so well that soon he cleared a passage for the entire party. dorothy was thinking so earnestly as they walked along that she did not notice when the scarecrow stumbled into a hole and rolled over to the side of the road. indeed he was obliged to call to her to help him up again. “why didn’t you walk around the hole?” asked the tin woodman. “i don’t know enough,” replied the scarecrow cheerfully. “my head is stuffed with straw, you know, and that is why i am going to oz to ask him for some brains.” “oh, i see,” said the tin woodman. “but, after all, brains are not the best things in the world.” “have you any?” inquired the scarecrow. “no, my head is quite empty,” answered the woodman. “but once i had brains, and a heart also; so, having tried them both, i should much rather have a heart.” “and why is that?” asked the scarecrow. “i will tell you my story, and then you will know.” so, while they were walking through the forest, the tin woodman told the following story: “i was born the son of a woodman who chopped down trees in the forest and sold the wood for a living. when i grew up, i too became a wood-chopper, and after my father died i took care of my old mother as long as she lived. then i made up my mind that instead of living alone i would marry, so that i might not become lonely. “there was one of the munchkin girls who was so beautiful that i soon grew to love her with all my heart. she, on her part, promised to marry me as soon as i could earn enough money to build a better house for her; so i set to work harder than ever. but the girl lived with an old woman who did not want her to marry anyone, for she was so lazy she wished the girl to remain with her and do the cooking and the housework. so the old woman went to the wicked witch of the east, and promised her two sheep and a cow if she would prevent the marriage. thereupon the wicked witch enchanted my axe, and when i was chopping away at my best one day, for i was anxious to get the new house and my wife as soon as possible, the axe slipped all at once and cut off my left leg. “this at first seemed a great misfortune, for i knew a one-legged man could not do very well as a wood-chopper. so i went to a tinsmith and had him make me a new leg out of tin. the leg worked very well, once i was used to it. but my action angered the wicked witch of the east, for she had promised the old woman i should not marry the pretty munchkin girl. when i began chopping again, my axe slipped and cut off my right leg. again i went to the tinsmith, and again he made me a leg out of tin. after this the enchanted axe cut off my arms, one after the other; but, nothing daunted, i had them replaced with tin ones. the wicked witch then made the axe slip and cut off my head, and at first i thought that was the end of me. but the tinsmith happened to come along, and he made me a new head out of tin. “i thought i had beaten the wicked witch then, and i worked harder than ever; but i little knew how cruel my enemy could be. she thought of a new way to kill my love for the beautiful munchkin maiden, and made my axe slip again, so that it cut right through my body, splitting me into two halves. once more the tinsmith came to my help and made me a body of tin, fastening my tin arms and legs and head to it, by means of joints, so that i could move around as well as ever. but, alas! i had now no heart, so that i lost all my love for the munchkin girl, and did not care whether i married her or not. i suppose she is still living with the old woman, waiting for me to come after her. “my body shone so brightly in the sun that i felt very proud of it and it did not matter now if my axe slipped, for it could not cut me. there was only one danger—that my joints would rust; but i kept an oil-can in my cottage and took care to oil myself whenever i needed it. however, there came a day when i forgot to do this, and, being caught in a rainstorm, before i thought of the danger my joints had rusted, and i was left to stand in the woods until you came to help me. it was a terrible thing to undergo, but during the year i stood there i had time to think that the greatest loss i had known was the loss of my heart. while i was in love i was the happiest man on earth; but no one can love who has not a heart, and so i am resolved to ask oz to give me one. if he does, i will go back to the munchkin maiden and marry her.” both dorothy and the scarecrow had been greatly interested in the story of the tin woodman, and now they knew why he was so anxious to get a new heart. “all the same,” said the scarecrow, “i shall ask for brains instead of a heart; for a fool would not know what to do with a heart if he had one.” “i shall take the heart,” returned the tin woodman; “for brains do not make one happy, and happiness is the best thing in the world.” dorothy did not say anything, for she was puzzled to know which of her two friends was right, and she decided if she could only get back to kansas and aunt em, it did not matter so much whether the woodman had no brains and the scarecrow no heart, or each got what he wanted. what worried her most was that the bread was nearly gone, and another meal for herself and toto would empty the basket. to be sure, neither the woodman nor the scarecrow ever ate anything, but she was not made of tin nor straw, and could not live unless she was fed. chapter vi the cowardly lion all this time dorothy and her companions had been walking through the thick woods. the road was still paved with yellow brick, but these were much covered by dried branches and dead leaves from the trees, and the walking was not at all good. there were few birds in this part of the forest, for birds love the open country where there is plenty of sunshine. but now and then there came a deep growl from some wild animal hidden among the trees. these sounds made the little girl’s heart beat fast, for she did not know what made them; but toto knew, and he walked close to dorothy’s side, and did not even bark in return. “how long will it be,” the child asked of the tin woodman, “before we are out of the forest?” “i cannot tell,” was the answer, “for i have never been to the emerald city. but my father went there once, when i was a boy, and he said it was a long journey through a dangerous country, although nearer to the city where oz dwells the country is beautiful. but i am not afraid so long as i have my oil-can, and nothing can hurt the scarecrow, while you bear upon your forehead the mark of the good witch’s kiss, and that will protect you from harm.” “but toto!” said the girl anxiously. “what will protect him?” “we must protect him ourselves if he is in danger,” replied the tin woodman. just as he spoke there came from the forest a terrible roar, and the next moment a great lion bounded into the road. with one blow of his paw he sent the scarecrow spinning over and over to the edge of the road, and then he struck at the tin woodman with his sharp claws. but, to the lion’s surprise, he could make no impression on the tin, although the woodman fell over in the road and lay still. little toto, now that he had an enemy to face, ran barking toward the lion, and the great beast had opened his mouth to bite the dog, when dorothy, fearing toto would be killed, and heedless of danger, rushed forward and slapped the lion upon his nose as hard as she could, while she cried out: “don’t you dare to bite toto! you ought to be ashamed of yourself, a big beast like you, to bite a poor little dog!” “i didn’t bite him,” said the lion, as he rubbed his nose with his paw where dorothy had hit it. “no, but you tried to,” she retorted. “you are nothing but a big coward.” “i know it,” said the lion, hanging his head in shame. “i’ve always known it. but how can i help it?” “i don’t know, i’m sure. to think of your striking a stuffed man, like the poor scarecrow!” “is he stuffed?” asked the lion in surprise, as he watched her pick up the scarecrow and set him upon his feet, while she patted him into shape again. “of course he’s stuffed,” replied dorothy, who was still angry. “that’s why he went over so easily,” remarked the lion. “it astonished me to see him whirl around so. is the other one stuffed also?” “no,” said dorothy, “he’s made of tin.” and she helped the woodman up again. “that’s why he nearly blunted my claws,” said the lion. “when they scratched against the tin it made a cold shiver run down my back. what is that little animal you are so tender of?” “he is my dog, toto,” answered dorothy. “is he made of tin, or stuffed?” asked the lion. “neither. he’s a—a—a meat dog,” said the girl. “oh! he’s a curious animal and seems remarkably small, now that i look at him. no one would think of biting such a little thing, except a coward like me,” continued the lion sadly. “what makes you a coward?” asked dorothy, looking at the great beast in wonder, for he was as big as a small horse. “it’s a mystery,” replied the lion. “i suppose i was born that way. all the other animals in the forest naturally expect me to be brave, for the lion is everywhere thought to be the king of beasts. i learned that if i roared very loudly every living thing was frightened and got out of my way. whenever i’ve met a man i’ve been awfully scared; but i just roared at him, and he has always run away as fast as he could go. if the elephants and the tigers and the bears had ever tried to fight me, i should have run myself—i’m such a coward; but just as soon as they hear me roar they all try to get away from me, and of course i let them go.” “but that isn’t right. the king of beasts shouldn’t be a coward,” said the scarecrow. “i know it,” returned the lion, wiping a tear from his eye with the tip of his tail. “it is my great sorrow, and makes my life very unhappy. but whenever there is danger, my heart begins to beat fast.” “perhaps you have heart disease,” said the tin woodman. “it may be,” said the lion. “if you have,” continued the tin woodman, “you ought to be glad, for it proves you have a heart. for my part, i have no heart; so i cannot have heart disease.” “perhaps,” said the lion thoughtfully, “if i had no heart i should not be a coward.” “have you brains?” asked the scarecrow. “i suppose so. i’ve never looked to see,” replied the lion. “i am going to the great oz to ask him to give me some,” remarked the scarecrow, “for my head is stuffed with straw.” “and i am going to ask him to give me a heart,” said the woodman. “and i am going to ask him to send toto and me back to kansas,” added dorothy. “do you think oz could give me courage?” asked the cowardly lion. “just as easily as he could give me brains,” said the scarecrow. “or give me a heart,” said the tin woodman. “or send me back to kansas,” said dorothy. “then, if you don’t mind, i’ll go with you,” said the lion, “for my life is simply unbearable without a bit of courage.” “you will be very welcome,” answered dorothy, “for you will help to keep away the other wild beasts. it seems to me they must be more cowardly than you are if they allow you to scare them so easily.” “they really are,” said the lion, “but that doesn’t make me any braver, and as long as i know myself to be a coward i shall be unhappy.” so once more the little company set off upon the journey, the lion walking with stately strides at dorothy’s side. toto did not approve of this new comrade at first, for he could not forget how nearly he had been crushed between the lion’s great jaws. but after a time he became more at ease, and presently toto and the cowardly lion had grown to be good friends. during the rest of that day there was no other adventure to mar the peace of their journey. once, indeed, the tin woodman stepped upon a beetle that was crawling along the road, and killed the poor little thing. this made the tin woodman very unhappy, for he was always careful not to hurt any living creature; and as he walked along he wept several tears of sorrow and regret. these tears ran slowly down his face and over the hinges of his jaw, and there they rusted. when dorothy presently asked him a question the tin woodman could not open his mouth, for his jaws were tightly rusted together. he became greatly frightened at this and made many motions to dorothy to relieve him, but she could not understand. the lion was also puzzled to know what was wrong. but the scarecrow seized the oil-can from dorothy’s basket and oiled the woodman’s jaws, so that after a few moments he could talk as well as before. “this will serve me a lesson,” said he, “to look where i step. for if i should kill another bug or beetle i should surely cry again, and crying rusts my jaws so that i cannot speak.” thereafter he walked very carefully, with his eyes on the road, and when he saw a tiny ant toiling by he would step over it, so as not to harm it. the tin woodman knew very well he had no heart, and therefore he took great care never to be cruel or unkind to anything. “you people with hearts,” he said, “have something to guide you, and need never do wrong; but i have no heart, and so i must be very careful. when oz gives me a heart of course i needn’t mind so much.” chapter vii the journey to the great oz they were obliged to camp out that night under a large tree in the forest, for there were no houses near. the tree made a good, thick covering to protect them from the dew, and the tin woodman chopped a great pile of wood with his axe and dorothy built a splendid fire that warmed her and made her feel less lonely. she and toto ate the last of their bread, and now she did not know what they would do for breakfast. “if you wish,” said the lion, “i will go into the forest and kill a deer for you. you can roast it by the fire, since your tastes are so peculiar that you prefer cooked food, and then you will have a very good breakfast.” “don’t! please don’t,” begged the tin woodman. “i should certainly weep if you killed a poor deer, and then my jaws would rust again.” but the lion went away into the forest and found his own supper, and no one ever knew what it was, for he didn’t mention it. and the scarecrow found a tree full of nuts and filled dorothy’s basket with them, so that she would not be hungry for a long time. she thought this was very kind and thoughtful of the scarecrow, but she laughed heartily at the awkward way in which the poor creature picked up the nuts. his padded hands were so clumsy and the nuts were so small that he dropped almost as many as he put in the basket. but the scarecrow did not mind how long it took him to fill the basket, for it enabled him to keep away from the fire, as he feared a spark might get into his straw and burn him up. so he kept a good distance away from the flames, and only came near to cover dorothy with dry leaves when she lay down to sleep. these kept her very snug and warm, and she slept soundly until morning. when it was daylight, the girl bathed her face in a little rippling brook, and soon after they all started toward the emerald city. this was to be an eventful day for the travelers. they had hardly been walking an hour when they saw before them a great ditch that crossed the road and divided the forest as far as they could see on either side. it was a very wide ditch, and when they crept up to the edge and looked into it they could see it was also very deep, and there were many big, jagged rocks at the bottom. the sides were so steep that none of them could climb down, and for a moment it seemed that their journey must end. “what shall we do?” asked dorothy despairingly. “i haven’t the faintest idea,” said the tin woodman, and the lion shook his shaggy mane and looked thoughtful. but the scarecrow said, “we cannot fly, that is certain. neither can we climb down into this great ditch. therefore, if we cannot jump over it, we must stop where we are.” “i think i could jump over it,” said the cowardly lion, after measuring the distance carefully in his mind. “then we are all right,” answered the scarecrow, “for you can carry us all over on your back, one at a time.” “well, i’ll try it,” said the lion. “who will go first?” “i will,” declared the scarecrow, “for, if you found that you could not jump over the gulf, dorothy would be killed, or the tin woodman badly dented on the rocks below. but if i am on your back it will not matter so much, for the fall would not hurt me at all.” “i am terribly afraid of falling, myself,” said the cowardly lion, “but i suppose there is nothing to do but try it. so get on my back and we will make the attempt.” the scarecrow sat upon the lion’s back, and the big beast walked to the edge of the gulf and crouched down. “why don’t you run and jump?” asked the scarecrow. “because that isn’t the way we lions do these things,” he replied. then giving a great spring, he shot through the air and landed safely on the other side. they were all greatly pleased to see how easily he did it, and after the scarecrow had got down from his back the lion sprang across the ditch again. dorothy thought she would go next; so she took toto in her arms and climbed on the lion’s back, holding tightly to his mane with one hand. the next moment it seemed as if she were flying through the air; and then, before she had time to think about it, she was safe on the other side. the lion went back a third time and got the tin woodman, and then they all sat down for a few moments to give the beast a chance to rest, for his great leaps had made his breath short, and he panted like a big dog that has been running too long. they found the forest very thick on this side, and it looked dark and gloomy. after the lion had rested they started along the road of yellow brick, silently wondering, each in his own mind, if ever they would come to the end of the woods and reach the bright sunshine again. to add to their discomfort, they soon heard strange noises in the depths of the forest, and the lion whispered to them that it was in this part of the country that the kalidahs lived. “what are the kalidahs?” asked the girl. “they are monstrous beasts with bodies like bears and heads like tigers,” replied the lion, “and with claws so long and sharp that they could tear me in two as easily as i could kill toto. i’m terribly afraid of the kalidahs.” “i’m not surprised that you are,” returned dorothy. “they must be dreadful beasts.” the lion was about to reply when suddenly they came to another gulf across the road. but this one was so broad and deep that the lion knew at once he could not leap across it. so they sat down to consider what they should do, and after serious thought the scarecrow said: “here is a great tree, standing close to the ditch. if the tin woodman can chop it down, so that it will fall to the other side, we can walk across it easily.” “that is a first-rate idea,” said the lion. “one would almost suspect you had brains in your head, instead of straw.” the woodman set to work at once, and so sharp was his axe that the tree was soon chopped nearly through. then the lion put his strong front legs against the tree and pushed with all his might, and slowly the big tree tipped and fell with a crash across the ditch, with its top branches on the other side. they had just started to cross this queer bridge when a sharp growl made them all look up, and to their horror they saw running toward them two great beasts with bodies like bears and heads like tigers. “they are the kalidahs!” said the cowardly lion, beginning to tremble. “quick!” cried the scarecrow. “let us cross over.” so dorothy went first, holding toto in her arms, the tin woodman followed, and the scarecrow came next. the lion, although he was certainly afraid, turned to face the kalidahs, and then he gave so loud and terrible a roar that dorothy screamed and the scarecrow fell over backward, while even the fierce beasts stopped short and looked at him in surprise. but, seeing they were bigger than the lion, and remembering that there were two of them and only one of him, the kalidahs again rushed forward, and the lion crossed over the tree and turned to see what they would do next. without stopping an instant the fierce beasts also began to cross the tree. and the lion said to dorothy: “we are lost, for they will surely tear us to pieces with their sharp claws. but stand close behind me, and i will fight them as long as i am alive.” “wait a minute!” called the scarecrow. he had been thinking what was best to be done, and now he asked the woodman to chop away the end of the tree that rested on their side of the ditch. the tin woodman began to use his axe at once, and, just as the two kalidahs were nearly across, the tree fell with a crash into the gulf, carrying the ugly, snarling brutes with it, and both were dashed to pieces on the sharp rocks at the bottom. “well,” said the cowardly lion, drawing a long breath of relief, “i see we are going to live a little while longer, and i am glad of it, for it must be a very uncomfortable thing not to be alive. those creatures frightened me so badly that my heart is beating yet.” “ah,” said the tin woodman sadly, “i wish i had a heart to beat.” this adventure made the travelers more anxious than ever to get out of the forest, and they walked so fast that dorothy became tired, and had to ride on the lion’s back. to their great joy the trees became thinner the farther they advanced, and in the afternoon they suddenly came upon a broad river, flowing swiftly just before them. on the other side of the water they could see the road of yellow brick running through a beautiful country, with green meadows dotted with bright flowers and all the road bordered with trees hanging full of delicious fruits. they were greatly pleased to see this delightful country before them. “how shall we cross the river?” asked dorothy. “that is easily done,” replied the scarecrow. “the tin woodman must build us a raft, so we can float to the other side.” so the woodman took his axe and began to chop down small trees to make a raft, and while he was busy at this the scarecrow found on the riverbank a tree full of fine fruit. this pleased dorothy, who had eaten nothing but nuts all day, and she made a hearty meal of the ripe fruit. but it takes time to make a raft, even when one is as industrious and untiring as the tin woodman, and when night came the work was not done. so they found a cozy place under the trees where they slept well until the morning; and dorothy dreamed of the emerald city, and of the good wizard oz, who would soon send her back to her own home again. chapter viii the deadly poppy field our little party of travelers awakened the next morning refreshed and full of hope, and dorothy breakfasted like a princess off peaches and plums from the trees beside the river. behind them was the dark forest they had passed safely through, although they had suffered many discouragements; but before them was a lovely, sunny country that seemed to beckon them on to the emerald city. to be sure, the broad river now cut them off from this beautiful land. but the raft was nearly done, and after the tin woodman had cut a few more logs and fastened them together with wooden pins, they were ready to start. dorothy sat down in the middle of the raft and held toto in her arms. when the cowardly lion stepped upon the raft it tipped badly, for he was big and heavy; but the scarecrow and the tin woodman stood upon the other end to steady it, and they had long poles in their hands to push the raft through the water. they got along quite well at first, but when they reached the middle of the river the swift current swept the raft downstream, farther and farther away from the road of yellow brick. and the water grew so deep that the long poles would not touch the bottom. “this is bad,” said the tin woodman, “for if we cannot get to the land we shall be carried into the country of the wicked witch of the west, and she will enchant us and make us her slaves.” “and then i should get no brains,” said the scarecrow. “and i should get no courage,” said the cowardly lion. “and i should get no heart,” said the tin woodman. “and i should never get back to kansas,” said dorothy. “we must certainly get to the emerald city if we can,” the scarecrow continued, and he pushed so hard on his long pole that it stuck fast in the mud at the bottom of the river. then, before he could pull it out again—or let go—the raft was swept away, and the poor scarecrow was left clinging to the pole in the middle of the river. “good-bye!” he called after them, and they were very sorry to leave him. indeed, the tin woodman began to cry, but fortunately remembered that he might rust, and so dried his tears on dorothy’s apron. of course this was a bad thing for the scarecrow. “i am now worse off than when i first met dorothy,” he thought. “then, i was stuck on a pole in a cornfield, where i could make-believe scare the crows, at any rate. but surely there is no use for a scarecrow stuck on a pole in the middle of a river. i am afraid i shall never have any brains, after all!” down the stream the raft floated, and the poor scarecrow was left far behind. then the lion said: “something must be done to save us. i think i can swim to the shore and pull the raft after me, if you will only hold fast to the tip of my tail.” so he sprang into the water, and the tin woodman caught fast hold of his tail. then the lion began to swim with all his might toward the shore. it was hard work, although he was so big; but by and by they were drawn out of the current, and then dorothy took the tin woodman’s long pole and helped push the raft to the land. they were all tired out when they reached the shore at last and stepped off upon the pretty green grass, and they also knew that the stream had carried them a long way past the road of yellow brick that led to the emerald city. “what shall we do now?” asked the tin woodman, as the lion lay down on the grass to let the sun dry him. “we must get back to the road, in some way,” said dorothy. “the best plan will be to walk along the riverbank until we come to the road again,” remarked the lion. so, when they were rested, dorothy picked up her basket and they started along the grassy bank, to the road from which the river had carried them. it was a lovely country, with plenty of flowers and fruit trees and sunshine to cheer them, and had they not felt so sorry for the poor scarecrow, they could have been very happy. they walked along as fast as they could, dorothy only stopping once to pick a beautiful flower; and after a time the tin woodman cried out: “look!” then they all looked at the river and saw the scarecrow perched upon his pole in the middle of the water, looking very lonely and sad. “what can we do to save him?” asked dorothy. the lion and the woodman both shook their heads, for they did not know. so they sat down upon the bank and gazed wistfully at the scarecrow until a stork flew by, who, upon seeing them, stopped to rest at the water’s edge. “who are you and where are you going?” asked the stork. “i am dorothy,” answered the girl, “and these are my friends, the tin woodman and the cowardly lion; and we are going to the emerald city.” “this isn’t the road,” said the stork, as she twisted her long neck and looked sharply at the queer party. “i know it,” returned dorothy, “but we have lost the scarecrow, and are wondering how we shall get him again.” “where is he?” asked the stork. “over there in the river,” answered the little girl. “if he wasn’t so big and heavy i would get him for you,” remarked the stork. “he isn’t heavy a bit,” said dorothy eagerly, “for he is stuffed with straw; and if you will bring him back to us, we shall thank you ever and ever so much.” “well, i’ll try,” said the stork, “but if i find he is too heavy to carry i shall have to drop him in the river again.” so the big bird flew into the air and over the water till she came to where the scarecrow was perched upon his pole. then the stork with her great claws grabbed the scarecrow by the arm and carried him up into the air and back to the bank, where dorothy and the lion and the tin woodman and toto were sitting. when the scarecrow found himself among his friends again, he was so happy that he hugged them all, even the lion and toto; and as they walked along he sang “tol-de-ri-de-oh!” at every step, he felt so gay. “i was afraid i should have to stay in the river forever,” he said, “but the kind stork saved me, and if i ever get any brains i shall find the stork again and do her some kindness in return.” “that’s all right,” said the stork, who was flying along beside them. “i always like to help anyone in trouble. but i must go now, for my babies are waiting in the nest for me. i hope you will find the emerald city and that oz will help you.” “thank you,” replied dorothy, and then the kind stork flew into the air and was soon out of sight. they walked along listening to the singing of the brightly colored birds and looking at the lovely flowers which now became so thick that the ground was carpeted with them. there were big yellow and white and blue and purple blossoms, besides great clusters of scarlet poppies, which were so brilliant in color they almost dazzled dorothy’s eyes. “aren’t they beautiful?” the girl asked, as she breathed in the spicy scent of the bright flowers. “i suppose so,” answered the scarecrow. “when i have brains, i shall probably like them better.” “if i only had a heart, i should love them,” added the tin woodman. “i always did like flowers,” said the lion. “they seem so helpless and frail. but there are none in the forest so bright as these.” they now came upon more and more of the big scarlet poppies, and fewer and fewer of the other flowers; and soon they found themselves in the midst of a great meadow of poppies. now it is well known that when there are many of these flowers together their odor is so powerful that anyone who breathes it falls asleep, and if the sleeper is not carried away from the scent of the flowers, he sleeps on and on forever. but dorothy did not know this, nor could she get away from the bright red flowers that were everywhere about; so presently her eyes grew heavy and she felt she must sit down to rest and to sleep. but the tin woodman would not let her do this. “we must hurry and get back to the road of yellow brick before dark,” he said; and the scarecrow agreed with him. so they kept walking until dorothy could stand no longer. her eyes closed in spite of herself and she forgot where she was and fell among the poppies, fast asleep. “what shall we do?” asked the tin woodman. “if we leave her here she will die,” said the lion. “the smell of the flowers is killing us all. i myself can scarcely keep my eyes open, and the dog is asleep already.” it was true; toto had fallen down beside his little mistress. but the scarecrow and the tin woodman, not being made of flesh, were not troubled by the scent of the flowers. “run fast,” said the scarecrow to the lion, “and get out of this deadly flower bed as soon as you can. we will bring the little girl with us, but if you should fall asleep you are too big to be carried.” so the lion aroused himself and bounded forward as fast as he could go. in a moment he was out of sight. “let us make a chair with our hands and carry her,” said the scarecrow. so they picked up toto and put the dog in dorothy’s lap, and then they made a chair with their hands for the seat and their arms for the arms and carried the sleeping girl between them through the flowers. on and on they walked, and it seemed that the great carpet of deadly flowers that surrounded them would never end. they followed the bend of the river, and at last came upon their friend the lion, lying fast asleep among the poppies. the flowers had been too strong for the huge beast and he had given up at last, and fallen only a short distance from the end of the poppy bed, where the sweet grass spread in beautiful green fields before them. “we can do nothing for him,” said the tin woodman, sadly; “for he is much too heavy to lift. we must leave him here to sleep on forever, and perhaps he will dream that he has found courage at last.” “i’m sorry,” said the scarecrow. “the lion was a very good comrade for one so cowardly. but let us go on.” they carried the sleeping girl to a pretty spot beside the river, far enough from the poppy field to prevent her breathing any more of the poison of the flowers, and here they laid her gently on the soft grass and waited for the fresh breeze to waken her. chapter ix the queen of the field mice “we cannot be far from the road of yellow brick, now,” remarked the scarecrow, as he stood beside the girl, “for we have come nearly as far as the river carried us away.” the tin woodman was about to reply when he heard a low growl, and turning his head (which worked beautifully on hinges) he saw a strange beast come bounding over the grass toward them. it was, indeed, a great yellow wildcat, and the woodman thought it must be chasing something, for its ears were lying close to its head and its mouth was wide open, showing two rows of ugly teeth, while its red eyes glowed like balls of fire. as it came nearer the tin woodman saw that running before the beast was a little gray field mouse, and although he had no heart he knew it was wrong for the wildcat to try to kill such a pretty, harmless creature. so the woodman raised his axe, and as the wildcat ran by he gave it a quick blow that cut the beast’s head clean off from its body, and it rolled over at his feet in two pieces. the field mouse, now that it was freed from its enemy, stopped short; and coming slowly up to the woodman it said, in a squeaky little voice: “oh, thank you! thank you ever so much for saving my life.” “don’t speak of it, i beg of you,” replied the woodman. “i have no heart, you know, so i am careful to help all those who may need a friend, even if it happens to be only a mouse.” “only a mouse!” cried the little animal, indignantly. “why, i am a queen—the queen of all the field mice!” “oh, indeed,” said the woodman, making a bow. “therefore you have done a great deed, as well as a brave one, in saving my life,” added the queen. at that moment several mice were seen running up as fast as their little legs could carry them, and when they saw their queen they exclaimed: “oh, your majesty, we thought you would be killed! how did you manage to escape the great wildcat?” they all bowed so low to the little queen that they almost stood upon their heads. “this funny tin man,” she answered, “killed the wildcat and saved my life. so hereafter you must all serve him, and obey his slightest wish.” “we will!” cried all the mice, in a shrill chorus. and then they scampered in all directions, for toto had awakened from his sleep, and seeing all these mice around him he gave one bark of delight and jumped right into the middle of the group. toto had always loved to chase mice when he lived in kansas, and he saw no harm in it. but the tin woodman caught the dog in his arms and held him tight, while he called to the mice, “come back! come back! toto shall not hurt you.” at this the queen of the mice stuck her head out from underneath a clump of grass and asked, in a timid voice, “are you sure he will not bite us?” “i will not let him,” said the woodman; “so do not be afraid.” one by one the mice came creeping back, and toto did not bark again, although he tried to get out of the woodman’s arms, and would have bitten him had he not known very well he was made of tin. finally one of the biggest mice spoke. “is there anything we can do,” it asked, “to repay you for saving the life of our queen?” “nothing that i know of,” answered the woodman; but the scarecrow, who had been trying to think, but could not because his head was stuffed with straw, said, quickly, “oh, yes; you can save our friend, the cowardly lion, who is asleep in the poppy bed.” “a lion!” cried the little queen. “why, he would eat us all up.” “oh, no,” declared the scarecrow; “this lion is a coward.” “really?” asked the mouse. “he says so himself,” answered the scarecrow, “and he would never hurt anyone who is our friend. if you will help us to save him i promise that he shall treat you all with kindness.” “very well,” said the queen, “we trust you. but what shall we do?” “are there many of these mice which call you queen and are willing to obey you?” “oh, yes; there are thousands,” she replied. “then send for them all to come here as soon as possible, and let each one bring a long piece of string.” the queen turned to the mice that attended her and told them to go at once and get all her people. as soon as they heard her orders they ran away in every direction as fast as possible. “now,” said the scarecrow to the tin woodman, “you must go to those trees by the riverside and make a truck that will carry the lion.” so the woodman went at once to the trees and began to work; and he soon made a truck out of the limbs of trees, from which he chopped away all the leaves and branches. he fastened it together with wooden pegs and made the four wheels out of short pieces of a big tree trunk. so fast and so well did he work that by the time the mice began to arrive the truck was all ready for them. they came from all directions, and there were thousands of them: big mice and little mice and middle-sized mice; and each one brought a piece of string in his mouth. it was about this time that dorothy woke from her long sleep and opened her eyes. she was greatly astonished to find herself lying upon the grass, with thousands of mice standing around and looking at her timidly. but the scarecrow told her about everything, and turning to the dignified little mouse, he said: “permit me to introduce to you her majesty, the queen.” dorothy nodded gravely and the queen made a curtsy, after which she became quite friendly with the little girl. the scarecrow and the woodman now began to fasten the mice to the truck, using the strings they had brought. one end of a string was tied around the neck of each mouse and the other end to the truck. of course the truck was a thousand times bigger than any of the mice who were to draw it; but when all the mice had been harnessed, they were able to pull it quite easily. even the scarecrow and the tin woodman could sit on it, and were drawn swiftly by their queer little horses to the place where the lion lay asleep. after a great deal of hard work, for the lion was heavy, they managed to get him up on the truck. then the queen hurriedly gave her people the order to start, for she feared if the mice stayed among the poppies too long they also would fall asleep. at first the little creatures, many though they were, could hardly stir the heavily loaded truck; but the woodman and the scarecrow both pushed from behind, and they got along better. soon they rolled the lion out of the poppy bed to the green fields, where he could breathe the sweet, fresh air again, instead of the poisonous scent of the flowers. dorothy came to meet them and thanked the little mice warmly for saving her companion from death. she had grown so fond of the big lion she was glad he had been rescued. then the mice were unharnessed from the truck and scampered away through the grass to their homes. the queen of the mice was the last to leave. “if ever you need us again,” she said, “come out into the field and call, and we shall hear you and come to your assistance. good-bye!” “good-bye!” they all answered, and away the queen ran, while dorothy held toto tightly lest he should run after her and frighten her. after this they sat down beside the lion until he should awaken; and the scarecrow brought dorothy some fruit from a tree near by, which she ate for her dinner. chapter x the guardian of the gate it was some time before the cowardly lion awakened, for he had lain among the poppies a long while, breathing in their deadly fragrance; but when he did open his eyes and roll off the truck he was very glad to find himself still alive. “i ran as fast as i could,” he said, sitting down and yawning, “but the flowers were too strong for me. how did you get me out?” then they told him of the field mice, and how they had generously saved him from death; and the cowardly lion laughed, and said: “i have always thought myself very big and terrible; yet such little things as flowers came near to killing me, and such small animals as mice have saved my life. how strange it all is! but, comrades, what shall we do now?” “we must journey on until we find the road of yellow brick again,” said dorothy, “and then we can keep on to the emerald city.” so, the lion being fully refreshed, and feeling quite himself again, they all started upon the journey, greatly enjoying the walk through the soft, fresh grass; and it was not long before they reached the road of yellow brick and turned again toward the emerald city where the great oz dwelt. the road was smooth and well paved, now, and the country about was beautiful, so that the travelers rejoiced in leaving the forest far behind, and with it the many dangers they had met in its gloomy shades. once more they could see fences built beside the road; but these were painted green, and when they came to a small house, in which a farmer evidently lived, that also was painted green. they passed by several of these houses during the afternoon, and sometimes people came to the doors and looked at them as if they would like to ask questions; but no one came near them nor spoke to them because of the great lion, of which they were very much afraid. the people were all dressed in clothing of a lovely emerald-green color and wore peaked hats like those of the munchkins. “this must be the land of oz,” said dorothy, “and we are surely getting near the emerald city.” “yes,” answered the scarecrow. “everything is green here, while in the country of the munchkins blue was the favorite color. but the people do not seem to be as friendly as the munchkins, and i’m afraid we shall be unable to find a place to pass the night.” “i should like something to eat besides fruit,” said the girl, “and i’m sure toto is nearly starved. let us stop at the next house and talk to the people.” so, when they came to a good-sized farmhouse, dorothy walked boldly up to the door and knocked. a woman opened it just far enough to look out, and said, “what do you want, child, and why is that great lion with you?” “we wish to pass the night with you, if you will allow us,” answered dorothy; “and the lion is my friend and comrade, and would not hurt you for the world.” “is he tame?” asked the woman, opening the door a little wider. “oh, yes,” said the girl, “and he is a great coward, too. he will be more afraid of you than you are of him.” “well,” said the woman, after thinking it over and taking another peep at the lion, “if that is the case you may come in, and i will give you some supper and a place to sleep.” so they all entered the house, where there were, besides the woman, two children and a man. the man had hurt his leg, and was lying on the couch in a corner. they seemed greatly surprised to see so strange a company, and while the woman was busy laying the table the man asked: “where are you all going?” “to the emerald city,” said dorothy, “to see the great oz.” “oh, indeed!” exclaimed the man. “are you sure that oz will see you?” “why not?” she replied. “why, it is said that he never lets anyone come into his presence. i have been to the emerald city many times, and it is a beautiful and wonderful place; but i have never been permitted to see the great oz, nor do i know of any living person who has seen him.” “does he never go out?” asked the scarecrow. “never. he sits day after day in the great throne room of his palace, and even those who wait upon him do not see him face to face.” “what is he like?” asked the girl. “that is hard to tell,” said the man thoughtfully. “you see, oz is a great wizard, and can take on any form he wishes. so that some say he looks like a bird; and some say he looks like an elephant; and some say he looks like a cat. to others he appears as a beautiful fairy, or a brownie, or in any other form that pleases him. but who the real oz is, when he is in his own form, no living person can tell.” “that is very strange,” said dorothy, “but we must try, in some way, to see him, or we shall have made our journey for nothing.” “why do you wish to see the terrible oz?” asked the man. “i want him to give me some brains,” said the scarecrow eagerly. “oh, oz could do that easily enough,” declared the man. “he has more brains than he needs.” “and i want him to give me a heart,” said the tin woodman. “that will not trouble him,” continued the man, “for oz has a large collection of hearts, of all sizes and shapes.” “and i want him to give me courage,” said the cowardly lion. “oz keeps a great pot of courage in his throne room,” said the man, “which he has covered with a golden plate, to keep it from running over. he will be glad to give you some.” “and i want him to send me back to kansas,” said dorothy. “where is kansas?” asked the man, with surprise. “i don’t know,” replied dorothy sorrowfully, “but it is my home, and i’m sure it’s somewhere.” “very likely. well, oz can do anything; so i suppose he will find kansas for you. but first you must get to see him, and that will be a hard task; for the great wizard does not like to see anyone, and he usually has his own way. but what do you want?” he continued, speaking to toto. toto only wagged his tail; for, strange to say, he could not speak. the woman now called to them that supper was ready, so they gathered around the table and dorothy ate some delicious porridge and a dish of scrambled eggs and a plate of nice white bread, and enjoyed her meal. the lion ate some of the porridge, but did not care for it, saying it was made from oats and oats were food for horses, not for lions. the scarecrow and the tin woodman ate nothing at all. toto ate a little of everything, and was glad to get a good supper again. the woman now gave dorothy a bed to sleep in, and toto lay down beside her, while the lion guarded the door of her room so she might not be disturbed. the scarecrow and the tin woodman stood up in a corner and kept quiet all night, although of course they could not sleep. the next morning, as soon as the sun was up, they started on their way, and soon saw a beautiful green glow in the sky just before them. “that must be the emerald city,” said dorothy. as they walked on, the green glow became brighter and brighter, and it seemed that at last they were nearing the end of their travels. yet it was afternoon before they came to the great wall that surrounded the city. it was high and thick and of a bright green color. in front of them, and at the end of the road of yellow brick, was a big gate, all studded with emeralds that glittered so in the sun that even the painted eyes of the scarecrow were dazzled by their brilliancy. there was a bell beside the gate, and dorothy pushed the button and heard a silvery tinkle sound within. then the big gate swung slowly open, and they all passed through and found themselves in a high arched room, the walls of which glistened with countless emeralds. before them stood a little man about the same size as the munchkins. he was clothed all in green, from his head to his feet, and even his skin was of a greenish tint. at his side was a large green box. when he saw dorothy and her companions the man asked, “what do you wish in the emerald city?” “we came here to see the great oz,” said dorothy. the man was so surprised at this answer that he sat down to think it over. “it has been many years since anyone asked me to see oz,” he said, shaking his head in perplexity. “he is powerful and terrible, and if you come on an idle or foolish errand to bother the wise reflections of the great wizard, he might be angry and destroy you all in an instant.” “but it is not a foolish errand, nor an idle one,” replied the scarecrow; “it is important. and we have been told that oz is a good wizard.” “so he is,” said the green man, “and he rules the emerald city wisely and well. but to those who are not honest, or who approach him from curiosity, he is most terrible, and few have ever dared ask to see his face. i am the guardian of the gates, and since you demand to see the great oz i must take you to his palace. but first you must put on the spectacles.” “why?” asked dorothy. “because if you did not wear spectacles the brightness and glory of the emerald city would blind you. even those who live in the city must wear spectacles night and day. they are all locked on, for oz so ordered it when the city was first built, and i have the only key that will unlock them.” he opened the big box, and dorothy saw that it was filled with spectacles of every size and shape. all of them had green glasses in them. the guardian of the gates found a pair that would just fit dorothy and put them over her eyes. there were two golden bands fastened to them that passed around the back of her head, where they were locked together by a little key that was at the end of a chain the guardian of the gates wore around his neck. when they were on, dorothy could not take them off had she wished, but of course she did not wish to be blinded by the glare of the emerald city, so she said nothing. then the green man fitted spectacles for the scarecrow and the tin woodman and the lion, and even on little toto; and all were locked fast with the key. then the guardian of the gates put on his own glasses and told them he was ready to show them to the palace. taking a big golden key from a peg on the wall, he opened another gate, and they all followed him through the portal into the streets of the emerald city. chapter xi the wonderful city of oz even with eyes protected by the green spectacles, dorothy and her friends were at first dazzled by the brilliancy of the wonderful city. the streets were lined with beautiful houses all built of green marble and studded everywhere with sparkling emeralds. they walked over a pavement of the same green marble, and where the blocks were joined together were rows of emeralds, set closely, and glittering in the brightness of the sun. the window panes were of green glass; even the sky above the city had a green tint, and the rays of the sun were green. there were many people—men, women, and children—walking about, and these were all dressed in green clothes and had greenish skins. they looked at dorothy and her strangely assorted company with wondering eyes, and the children all ran away and hid behind their mothers when they saw the lion; but no one spoke to them. many shops stood in the street, and dorothy saw that everything in them was green. green candy and green pop-corn were offered for sale, as well as green shoes, green hats, and green clothes of all sorts. at one place a man was selling green lemonade, and when the children bought it dorothy could see that they paid for it with green pennies. there seemed to be no horses nor animals of any kind; the men carried things around in little green carts, which they pushed before them. everyone seemed happy and contented and prosperous. the guardian of the gates led them through the streets until they came to a big building, exactly in the middle of the city, which was the palace of oz, the great wizard. there was a soldier before the door, dressed in a green uniform and wearing a long green beard. “here are strangers,” said the guardian of the gates to him, “and they demand to see the great oz.” “step inside,” answered the soldier, “and i will carry your message to him.” so they passed through the palace gates and were led into a big room with a green carpet and lovely green furniture set with emeralds. the soldier made them all wipe their feet upon a green mat before entering this room, and when they were seated he said politely: “please make yourselves comfortable while i go to the door of the throne room and tell oz you are here.” they had to wait a long time before the soldier returned. when, at last, he came back, dorothy asked: “have you seen oz?” “oh, no,” returned the soldier; “i have never seen him. but i spoke to him as he sat behind his screen and gave him your message. he said he will grant you an audience, if you so desire; but each one of you must enter his presence alone, and he will admit but one each day. therefore, as you must remain in the palace for several days, i will have you shown to rooms where you may rest in comfort after your journey.” “thank you,” replied the girl; “that is very kind of oz.” the soldier now blew upon a green whistle, and at once a young girl, dressed in a pretty green silk gown, entered the room. she had lovely green hair and green eyes, and she bowed low before dorothy as she said, “follow me and i will show you your room.” so dorothy said good-bye to all her friends except toto, and taking the dog in her arms followed the green girl through seven passages and up three flights of stairs until they came to a room at the front of the palace. it was the sweetest little room in the world, with a soft comfortable bed that had sheets of green silk and a green velvet counterpane. there was a tiny fountain in the middle of the room, that shot a spray of green perfume into the air, to fall back into a beautifully carved green marble basin. beautiful green flowers stood in the windows, and there was a shelf with a row of little green books. when dorothy had time to open these books she found them full of queer green pictures that made her laugh, they were so funny. in a wardrobe were many green dresses, made of silk and satin and velvet; and all of them fitted dorothy exactly. “make yourself perfectly at home,” said the green girl, “and if you wish for anything ring the bell. oz will send for you tomorrow morning.” she left dorothy alone and went back to the others. these she also led to rooms, and each one of them found himself lodged in a very pleasant part of the palace. of course this politeness was wasted on the scarecrow; for when he found himself alone in his room he stood stupidly in one spot, just within the doorway, to wait till morning. it would not rest him to lie down, and he could not close his eyes; so he remained all night staring at a little spider which was weaving its web in a corner of the room, just as if it were not one of the most wonderful rooms in the world. the tin woodman lay down on his bed from force of habit, for he remembered when he was made of flesh; but not being able to sleep, he passed the night moving his joints up and down to make sure they kept in good working order. the lion would have preferred a bed of dried leaves in the forest, and did not like being shut up in a room; but he had too much sense to let this worry him, so he sprang upon the bed and rolled himself up like a cat and purred himself asleep in a minute. the next morning, after breakfast, the green maiden came to fetch dorothy, and she dressed her in one of the prettiest gowns, made of green brocaded satin. dorothy put on a green silk apron and tied a green ribbon around toto’s neck, and they started for the throne room of the great oz. first they came to a great hall in which were many ladies and gentlemen of the court, all dressed in rich costumes. these people had nothing to do but talk to each other, but they always came to wait outside the throne room every morning, although they were never permitted to see oz. as dorothy entered they looked at her curiously, and one of them whispered: “are you really going to look upon the face of oz the terrible?” “of course,” answered the girl, “if he will see me.” “oh, he will see you,” said the soldier who had taken her message to the wizard, “although he does not like to have people ask to see him. indeed, at first he was angry and said i should send you back where you came from. then he asked me what you looked like, and when i mentioned your silver shoes he was very much interested. at last i told him about the mark upon your forehead, and he decided he would admit you to his presence.” just then a bell rang, and the green girl said to dorothy, “that is the signal. you must go into the throne room alone.” she opened a little door and dorothy walked boldly through and found herself in a wonderful place. it was a big, round room with a high arched roof, and the walls and ceiling and floor were covered with large emeralds set closely together. in the center of the roof was a great light, as bright as the sun, which made the emeralds sparkle in a wonderful manner. but what interested dorothy most was the big throne of green marble that stood in the middle of the room. it was shaped like a chair and sparkled with gems, as did everything else. in the center of the chair was an enormous head, without a body to support it or any arms or legs whatever. there was no hair upon this head, but it had eyes and a nose and mouth, and was much bigger than the head of the biggest giant. as dorothy gazed upon this in wonder and fear, the eyes turned slowly and looked at her sharply and steadily. then the mouth moved, and dorothy heard a voice say: “i am oz, the great and terrible. who are you, and why do you seek me?” it was not such an awful voice as she had expected to come from the big head; so she took courage and answered: “i am dorothy, the small and meek. i have come to you for help.” the eyes looked at her thoughtfully for a full minute. then said the voice: “where did you get the silver shoes?” “i got them from the wicked witch of the east, when my house fell on her and killed her,” she replied. “where did you get the mark upon your forehead?” continued the voice. “that is where the good witch of the north kissed me when she bade me good-bye and sent me to you,” said the girl. again the eyes looked at her sharply, and they saw she was telling the truth. then oz asked, “what do you wish me to do?” “send me back to kansas, where my aunt em and uncle henry are,” she answered earnestly. “i don’t like your country, although it is so beautiful. and i am sure aunt em will be dreadfully worried over my being away so long.” the eyes winked three times, and then they turned up to the ceiling and down to the floor and rolled around so queerly that they seemed to see every part of the room. and at last they looked at dorothy again. “why should i do this for you?” asked oz. “because you are strong and i am weak; because you are a great wizard and i am only a little girl.” “but you were strong enough to kill the wicked witch of the east,” said oz. “that just happened,” returned dorothy simply; “i could not help it.” “well,” said the head, “i will give you my answer. you have no right to expect me to send you back to kansas unless you do something for me in return. in this country everyone must pay for everything he gets. if you wish me to use my magic power to send you home again you must do something for me first. help me and i will help you.” “what must i do?” asked the girl. “kill the wicked witch of the west,” answered oz. “but i cannot!” exclaimed dorothy, greatly surprised. “you killed the witch of the east and you wear the silver shoes, which bear a powerful charm. there is now but one wicked witch left in all this land, and when you can tell me she is dead i will send you back to kansas—but not before.” the little girl began to weep, she was so much disappointed; and the eyes winked again and looked upon her anxiously, as if the great oz felt that she could help him if she would. “i never killed anything, willingly,” she sobbed. “even if i wanted to, how could i kill the wicked witch? if you, who are great and terrible, cannot kill her yourself, how do you expect me to do it?” “i do not know,” said the head; “but that is my answer, and until the wicked witch dies you will not see your uncle and aunt again. remember that the witch is wicked—tremendously wicked—and ought to be killed. now go, and do not ask to see me again until you have done your task.” sorrowfully dorothy left the throne room and went back where the lion and the scarecrow and the tin woodman were waiting to hear what oz had said to her. “there is no hope for me,” she said sadly, “for oz will not send me home until i have killed the wicked witch of the west; and that i can never do.” her friends were sorry, but could do nothing to help her; so dorothy went to her own room and lay down on the bed and cried herself to sleep. the next morning the soldier with the green whiskers came to the scarecrow and said: “come with me, for oz has sent for you.” so the scarecrow followed him and was admitted into the great throne room, where he saw, sitting in the emerald throne, a most lovely lady. she was dressed in green silk gauze and wore upon her flowing green locks a crown of jewels. growing from her shoulders were wings, gorgeous in color and so light that they fluttered if the slightest breath of air reached them. when the scarecrow had bowed, as prettily as his straw stuffing would let him, before this beautiful creature, she looked upon him sweetly, and said: “i am oz, the great and terrible. who are you, and why do you seek me?” now the scarecrow, who had expected to see the great head dorothy had told him of, was much astonished; but he answered her bravely. “i am only a scarecrow, stuffed with straw. therefore i have no brains, and i come to you praying that you will put brains in my head instead of straw, so that i may become as much a man as any other in your dominions.” “why should i do this for you?” asked the lady. “because you are wise and powerful, and no one else can help me,” answered the scarecrow. “i never grant favors without some return,” said oz; “but this much i will promise. if you will kill for me the wicked witch of the west, i will bestow upon you a great many brains, and such good brains that you will be the wisest man in all the land of oz.” “i thought you asked dorothy to kill the witch,” said the scarecrow, in surprise. “so i did. i don’t care who kills her. but until she is dead i will not grant your wish. now go, and do not seek me again until you have earned the brains you so greatly desire.” the scarecrow went sorrowfully back to his friends and told them what oz had said; and dorothy was surprised to find that the great wizard was not a head, as she had seen him, but a lovely lady. “all the same,” said the scarecrow, “she needs a heart as much as the tin woodman.” on the next morning the soldier with the green whiskers came to the tin woodman and said: “oz has sent for you. follow me.” so the tin woodman followed him and came to the great throne room. he did not know whether he would find oz a lovely lady or a head, but he hoped it would be the lovely lady. “for,” he said to himself, “if it is the head, i am sure i shall not be given a heart, since a head has no heart of its own and therefore cannot feel for me. but if it is the lovely lady i shall beg hard for a heart, for all ladies are themselves said to be kindly hearted.” but when the woodman entered the great throne room he saw neither the head nor the lady, for oz had taken the shape of a most terrible beast. it was nearly as big as an elephant, and the green throne seemed hardly strong enough to hold its weight. the beast had a head like that of a rhinoceros, only there were five eyes in its face. there were five long arms growing out of its body, and it also had five long, slim legs. thick, woolly hair covered every part of it, and a more dreadful-looking monster could not be imagined. it was fortunate the tin woodman had no heart at that moment, for it would have beat loud and fast from terror. but being only tin, the woodman was not at all afraid, although he was much disappointed. “i am oz, the great and terrible,” spoke the beast, in a voice that was one great roar. “who are you, and why do you seek me?” “i am a woodman, and made of tin. therefore i have no heart, and cannot love. i pray you to give me a heart that i may be as other men are.” “why should i do this?” demanded the beast. “because i ask it, and you alone can grant my request,” answered the woodman. oz gave a low growl at this, but said, gruffly: “if you indeed desire a heart, you must earn it.” “how?” asked the woodman. “help dorothy to kill the wicked witch of the west,” replied the beast. “when the witch is dead, come to me, and i will then give you the biggest and kindest and most loving heart in all the land of oz.” so the tin woodman was forced to return sorrowfully to his friends and tell them of the terrible beast he had seen. they all wondered greatly at the many forms the great wizard could take upon himself, and the lion said: “if he is a beast when i go to see him, i shall roar my loudest, and so frighten him that he will grant all i ask. and if he is the lovely lady, i shall pretend to spring upon her, and so compel her to do my bidding. and if he is the great head, he will be at my mercy; for i will roll this head all about the room until he promises to give us what we desire. so be of good cheer, my friends, for all will yet be well.” the next morning the soldier with the green whiskers led the lion to the great throne room and bade him enter the presence of oz. the lion at once passed through the door, and glancing around saw, to his surprise, that before the throne was a ball of fire, so fierce and glowing he could scarcely bear to gaze upon it. his first thought was that oz had by accident caught on fire and was burning up; but when he tried to go nearer, the heat was so intense that it singed his whiskers, and he crept back tremblingly to a spot nearer the door. then a low, quiet voice came from the ball of fire, and these were the words it spoke: “i am oz, the great and terrible. who are you, and why do you seek me?” and the lion answered, “i am a cowardly lion, afraid of everything. i came to you to beg that you give me courage, so that in reality i may become the king of beasts, as men call me.” “why should i give you courage?” demanded oz. “because of all wizards you are the greatest, and alone have power to grant my request,” answered the lion. the ball of fire burned fiercely for a time, and the voice said, “bring me proof that the wicked witch is dead, and that moment i will give you courage. but as long as the witch lives, you must remain a coward.” the lion was angry at this speech, but could say nothing in reply, and while he stood silently gazing at the ball of fire it became so furiously hot that he turned tail and rushed from the room. he was glad to find his friends waiting for him, and told them of his terrible interview with the wizard. “what shall we do now?” asked dorothy sadly. “there is only one thing we can do,” returned the lion, “and that is to go to the land of the winkies, seek out the wicked witch, and destroy her.” “but suppose we cannot?” said the girl. “then i shall never have courage,” declared the lion. “and i shall never have brains,” added the scarecrow. “and i shall never have a heart,” spoke the tin woodman. “and i shall never see aunt em and uncle henry,” said dorothy, beginning to cry. “be careful!” cried the green girl. “the tears will fall on your green silk gown and spot it.” so dorothy dried her eyes and said, “i suppose we must try it; but i am sure i do not want to kill anybody, even to see aunt em again.” “i will go with you; but i’m too much of a coward to kill the witch,” said the lion. “i will go too,” declared the scarecrow; “but i shall not be of much help to you, i am such a fool.” “i haven’t the heart to harm even a witch,” remarked the tin woodman; “but if you go i certainly shall go with you.” therefore it was decided to start upon their journey the next morning, and the woodman sharpened his axe on a green grindstone and had all his joints properly oiled. the scarecrow stuffed himself with fresh straw and dorothy put new paint on his eyes that he might see better. the green girl, who was very kind to them, filled dorothy’s basket with good things to eat, and fastened a little bell around toto’s neck with a green ribbon. they went to bed quite early and slept soundly until daylight, when they were awakened by the crowing of a green cock that lived in the back yard of the palace, and the cackling of a hen that had laid a green egg. chapter xii the search for the wicked witch the soldier with the green whiskers led them through the streets of the emerald city until they reached the room where the guardian of the gates lived. this officer unlocked their spectacles to put them back in his great box, and then he politely opened the gate for our friends. “which road leads to the wicked witch of the west?” asked dorothy. “there is no road,” answered the guardian of the gates. “no one ever wishes to go that way.” “how, then, are we to find her?” inquired the girl. “that will be easy,” replied the man, “for when she knows you are in the country of the winkies she will find you, and make you all her slaves.” “perhaps not,” said the scarecrow, “for we mean to destroy her.” “oh, that is different,” said the guardian of the gates. “no one has ever destroyed her before, so i naturally thought she would make slaves of you, as she has of the rest. but take care; for she is wicked and fierce, and may not allow you to destroy her. keep to the west, where the sun sets, and you cannot fail to find her.” they thanked him and bade him good-bye, and turned toward the west, walking over fields of soft grass dotted here and there with daisies and buttercups. dorothy still wore the pretty silk dress she had put on in the palace, but now, to her surprise, she found it was no longer green, but pure white. the ribbon around toto’s neck had also lost its green color and was as white as dorothy’s dress. the emerald city was soon left far behind. as they advanced the ground became rougher and hillier, for there were no farms nor houses in this country of the west, and the ground was untilled. in the afternoon the sun shone hot in their faces, for there were no trees to offer them shade; so that before night dorothy and toto and the lion were tired, and lay down upon the grass and fell asleep, with the woodman and the scarecrow keeping watch. now the wicked witch of the west had but one eye, yet that was as powerful as a telescope, and could see everywhere. so, as she sat in the door of her castle, she happened to look around and saw dorothy lying asleep, with her friends all about her. they were a long distance off, but the wicked witch was angry to find them in her country; so she blew upon a silver whistle that hung around her neck. at once there came running to her from all directions a pack of great wolves. they had long legs and fierce eyes and sharp teeth. “go to those people,” said the witch, “and tear them to pieces.” “are you not going to make them your slaves?” asked the leader of the wolves. “no,” she answered, “one is of tin, and one of straw; one is a girl and another a lion. none of them is fit to work, so you may tear them into small pieces.” “very well,” said the wolf, and he dashed away at full speed, followed by the others. it was lucky the scarecrow and the woodman were wide awake and heard the wolves coming. “this is my fight,” said the woodman, “so get behind me and i will meet them as they come.” he seized his axe, which he had made very sharp, and as the leader of the wolves came on the tin woodman swung his arm and chopped the wolf’s head from its body, so that it immediately died. as soon as he could raise his axe another wolf came up, and he also fell under the sharp edge of the tin woodman’s weapon. there were forty wolves, and forty times a wolf was killed, so that at last they all lay dead in a heap before the woodman. then he put down his axe and sat beside the scarecrow, who said, “it was a good fight, friend.” they waited until dorothy awoke the next morning. the little girl was quite frightened when she saw the great pile of shaggy wolves, but the tin woodman told her all. she thanked him for saving them and sat down to breakfast, after which they started again upon their journey. now this same morning the wicked witch came to the door of her castle and looked out with her one eye that could see far off. she saw all her wolves lying dead, and the strangers still traveling through her country. this made her angrier than before, and she blew her silver whistle twice. straightway a great flock of wild crows came flying toward her, enough to darken the sky. and the wicked witch said to the king crow, “fly at once to the strangers; peck out their eyes and tear them to pieces.” the wild crows flew in one great flock toward dorothy and her companions. when the little girl saw them coming she was afraid. but the scarecrow said, “this is my battle, so lie down beside me and you will not be harmed.” so they all lay upon the ground except the scarecrow, and he stood up and stretched out his arms. and when the crows saw him they were frightened, as these birds always are by scarecrows, and did not dare to come any nearer. but the king crow said: “it is only a stuffed man. i will peck his eyes out.” the king crow flew at the scarecrow, who caught it by the head and twisted its neck until it died. and then another crow flew at him, and the scarecrow twisted its neck also. there were forty crows, and forty times the scarecrow twisted a neck, until at last all were lying dead beside him. then he called to his companions to rise, and again they went upon their journey. when the wicked witch looked out again and saw all her crows lying in a heap, she got into a terrible rage, and blew three times upon her silver whistle. forthwith there was heard a great buzzing in the air, and a swarm of black bees came flying toward her. “go to the strangers and sting them to death!” commanded the witch, and the bees turned and flew rapidly until they came to where dorothy and her friends were walking. but the woodman had seen them coming, and the scarecrow had decided what to do. “take out my straw and scatter it over the little girl and the dog and the lion,” he said to the woodman, “and the bees cannot sting them.” this the woodman did, and as dorothy lay close beside the lion and held toto in her arms, the straw covered them entirely. the bees came and found no one but the woodman to sting, so they flew at him and broke off all their stings against the tin, without hurting the woodman at all. and as bees cannot live when their stings are broken that was the end of the black bees, and they lay scattered thick about the woodman, like little heaps of fine coal. then dorothy and the lion got up, and the girl helped the tin woodman put the straw back into the scarecrow again, until he was as good as ever. so they started upon their journey once more. the wicked witch was so angry when she saw her black bees in little heaps like fine coal that she stamped her foot and tore her hair and gnashed her teeth. and then she called a dozen of her slaves, who were the winkies, and gave them sharp spears, telling them to go to the strangers and destroy them. the winkies were not a brave people, but they had to do as they were told. so they marched away until they came near to dorothy. then the lion gave a great roar and sprang towards them, and the poor winkies were so frightened that they ran back as fast as they could. when they returned to the castle the wicked witch beat them well with a strap, and sent them back to their work, after which she sat down to think what she should do next. she could not understand how all her plans to destroy these strangers had failed; but she was a powerful witch, as well as a wicked one, and she soon made up her mind how to act. there was, in her cupboard, a golden cap, with a circle of diamonds and rubies running round it. this golden cap had a charm. whoever owned it could call three times upon the winged monkeys, who would obey any order they were given. but no person could command these strange creatures more than three times. twice already the wicked witch had used the charm of the cap. once was when she had made the winkies her slaves, and set herself to rule over their country. the winged monkeys had helped her do this. the second time was when she had fought against the great oz himself, and driven him out of the land of the west. the winged monkeys had also helped her in doing this. only once more could she use this golden cap, for which reason she did not like to do so until all her other powers were exhausted. but now that her fierce wolves and her wild crows and her stinging bees were gone, and her slaves had been scared away by the cowardly lion, she saw there was only one way left to destroy dorothy and her friends. so the wicked witch took the golden cap from her cupboard and placed it upon her head. then she stood upon her left foot and said, slowly: “ep-pe, pep-pe, kak-ke!” next she stood upon her right foot and said: “hil-lo, hol-lo, hel-lo!” after this she stood upon both feet and cried in a loud voice: “ziz-zy, zuz-zy, zik!” now the charm began to work. the sky was darkened, and a low rumbling sound was heard in the air. there was a rushing of many wings, a great chattering and laughing, and the sun came out of the dark sky to show the wicked witch surrounded by a crowd of monkeys, each with a pair of immense and powerful wings on his shoulders. one, much bigger than the others, seemed to be their leader. he flew close to the witch and said, “you have called us for the third and last time. what do you command?” “go to the strangers who are within my land and destroy them all except the lion,” said the wicked witch. “bring that beast to me, for i have a mind to harness him like a horse, and make him work.” “your commands shall be obeyed,” said the leader. then, with a great deal of chattering and noise, the winged monkeys flew away to the place where dorothy and her friends were walking. some of the monkeys seized the tin woodman and carried him through the air until they were over a country thickly covered with sharp rocks. here they dropped the poor woodman, who fell a great distance to the rocks, where he lay so battered and dented that he could neither move nor groan. others of the monkeys caught the scarecrow, and with their long fingers pulled all of the straw out of his clothes and head. they made his hat and boots and clothes into a small bundle and threw it into the top branches of a tall tree. the remaining monkeys threw pieces of stout rope around the lion and wound many coils about his body and head and legs, until he was unable to bite or scratch or struggle in any way. then they lifted him up and flew away with him to the witch’s castle, where he was placed in a small yard with a high iron fence around it, so that he could not escape. but dorothy they did not harm at all. she stood, with toto in her arms, watching the sad fate of her comrades and thinking it would soon be her turn. the leader of the winged monkeys flew up to her, his long, hairy arms stretched out and his ugly face grinning terribly; but he saw the mark of the good witch’s kiss upon her forehead and stopped short, motioning the others not to touch her. “we dare not harm this little girl,” he said to them, “for she is protected by the power of good, and that is greater than the power of evil. all we can do is to carry her to the castle of the wicked witch and leave her there.” so, carefully and gently, they lifted dorothy in their arms and carried her swiftly through the air until they came to the castle, where they set her down upon the front doorstep. then the leader said to the witch: “we have obeyed you as far as we were able. the tin woodman and the scarecrow are destroyed, and the lion is tied up in your yard. the little girl we dare not harm, nor the dog she carries in her arms. your power over our band is now ended, and you will never see us again.” then all the winged monkeys, with much laughing and chattering and noise, flew into the air and were soon out of sight. the wicked witch was both surprised and worried when she saw the mark on dorothy’s forehead, for she knew well that neither the winged monkeys nor she, herself, dare hurt the girl in any way. she looked down at dorothy’s feet, and seeing the silver shoes, began to tremble with fear, for she knew what a powerful charm belonged to them. at first the witch was tempted to run away from dorothy; but she happened to look into the child’s eyes and saw how simple the soul behind them was, and that the little girl did not know of the wonderful power the silver shoes gave her. so the wicked witch laughed to herself, and thought, “i can still make her my slave, for she does not know how to use her power.” then she said to dorothy, harshly and severely: “come with me; and see that you mind everything i tell you, for if you do not i will make an end of you, as i did of the tin woodman and the scarecrow.” dorothy followed her through many of the beautiful rooms in her castle until they came to the kitchen, where the witch bade her clean the pots and kettles and sweep the floor and keep the fire fed with wood. dorothy went to work meekly, with her mind made up to work as hard as she could; for she was glad the wicked witch had decided not to kill her. with dorothy hard at work, the witch thought she would go into the courtyard and harness the cowardly lion like a horse; it would amuse her, she was sure, to make him draw her chariot whenever she wished to go to drive. but as she opened the gate the lion gave a loud roar and bounded at her so fiercely that the witch was afraid, and ran out and shut the gate again. “if i cannot harness you,” said the witch to the lion, speaking through the bars of the gate, “i can starve you. you shall have nothing to eat until you do as i wish.” so after that she took no food to the imprisoned lion; but every day she came to the gate at noon and asked, “are you ready to be harnessed like a horse?” and the lion would answer, “no. if you come in this yard, i will bite you.” the reason the lion did not have to do as the witch wished was that every night, while the woman was asleep, dorothy carried him food from the cupboard. after he had eaten he would lie down on his bed of straw, and dorothy would lie beside him and put her head on his soft, shaggy mane, while they talked of their troubles and tried to plan some way to escape. but they could find no way to get out of the castle, for it was constantly guarded by the yellow winkies, who were the slaves of the wicked witch and too afraid of her not to do as she told them. the girl had to work hard during the day, and often the witch threatened to beat her with the same old umbrella she always carried in her hand. but, in truth, she did not dare to strike dorothy, because of the mark upon her forehead. the child did not know this, and was full of fear for herself and toto. once the witch struck toto a blow with her umbrella and the brave little dog flew at her and bit her leg in return. the witch did not bleed where she was bitten, for she was so wicked that the blood in her had dried up many years before. dorothy’s life became very sad as she grew to understand that it would be harder than ever to get back to kansas and aunt em again. sometimes she would cry bitterly for hours, with toto sitting at her feet and looking into her face, whining dismally to show how sorry he was for his little mistress. toto did not really care whether he was in kansas or the land of oz so long as dorothy was with him; but he knew the little girl was unhappy, and that made him unhappy too. now the wicked witch had a great longing to have for her own the silver shoes which the girl always wore. her bees and her crows and her wolves were lying in heaps and drying up, and she had used up all the power of the golden cap; but if she could only get hold of the silver shoes, they would give her more power than all the other things she had lost. she watched dorothy carefully, to see if she ever took off her shoes, thinking she might steal them. but the child was so proud of her pretty shoes that she never took them off except at night and when she took her bath. the witch was too much afraid of the dark to dare go in dorothy’s room at night to take the shoes, and her dread of water was greater than her fear of the dark, so she never came near when dorothy was bathing. indeed, the old witch never touched water, nor ever let water touch her in any way. but the wicked creature was very cunning, and she finally thought of a trick that would give her what she wanted. she placed a bar of iron in the middle of the kitchen floor, and then by her magic arts made the iron invisible to human eyes. so that when dorothy walked across the floor she stumbled over the bar, not being able to see it, and fell at full length. she was not much hurt, but in her fall one of the silver shoes came off; and before she could reach it, the witch had snatched it away and put it on her own skinny foot. the wicked woman was greatly pleased with the success of her trick, for as long as she had one of the shoes she owned half the power of their charm, and dorothy could not use it against her, even had she known how to do so. the little girl, seeing she had lost one of her pretty shoes, grew angry, and said to the witch, “give me back my shoe!” “i will not,” retorted the witch, “for it is now my shoe, and not yours.” “you are a wicked creature!” cried dorothy. “you have no right to take my shoe from me.” “i shall keep it, just the same,” said the witch, laughing at her, “and someday i shall get the other one from you, too.” this made dorothy so very angry that she picked up the bucket of water that stood near and dashed it over the witch, wetting her from head to foot. instantly the wicked woman gave a loud cry of fear, and then, as dorothy looked at her in wonder, the witch began to shrink and fall away. “see what you have done!” she screamed. “in a minute i shall melt away.” “i’m very sorry, indeed,” said dorothy, who was truly frightened to see the witch actually melting away like brown sugar before her very eyes. “didn’t you know water would be the end of me?” asked the witch, in a wailing, despairing voice. “of course not,” answered dorothy. “how should i?” “well, in a few minutes i shall be all melted, and you will have the castle to yourself. i have been wicked in my day, but i never thought a little girl like you would ever be able to melt me and end my wicked deeds. look out—here i go!” with these words the witch fell down in a brown, melted, shapeless mass and began to spread over the clean boards of the kitchen floor. seeing that she had really melted away to nothing, dorothy drew another bucket of water and threw it over the mess. she then swept it all out the door. after picking out the silver shoe, which was all that was left of the old woman, she cleaned and dried it with a cloth, and put it on her foot again. then, being at last free to do as she chose, she ran out to the courtyard to tell the lion that the wicked witch of the west had come to an end, and that they were no longer prisoners in a strange land. chapter xiii the rescue the cowardly lion was much pleased to hear that the wicked witch had been melted by a bucket of water, and dorothy at once unlocked the gate of his prison and set him free. they went in together to the castle, where dorothy’s first act was to call all the winkies together and tell them that they were no longer slaves. there was great rejoicing among the yellow winkies, for they had been made to work hard during many years for the wicked witch, who had always treated them with great cruelty. they kept this day as a holiday, then and ever after, and spent the time in feasting and dancing. “if our friends, the scarecrow and the tin woodman, were only with us,” said the lion, “i should be quite happy.” “don’t you suppose we could rescue them?” asked the girl anxiously. “we can try,” answered the lion. so they called the yellow winkies and asked them if they would help to rescue their friends, and the winkies said that they would be delighted to do all in their power for dorothy, who had set them free from bondage. so she chose a number of the winkies who looked as if they knew the most, and they all started away. they traveled that day and part of the next until they came to the rocky plain where the tin woodman lay, all battered and bent. his axe was near him, but the blade was rusted and the handle broken off short. the winkies lifted him tenderly in their arms, and carried him back to the yellow castle again, dorothy shedding a few tears by the way at the sad plight of her old friend, and the lion looking sober and sorry. when they reached the castle dorothy said to the winkies: “are any of your people tinsmiths?” “oh, yes. some of us are very good tinsmiths,” they told her. “then bring them to me,” she said. and when the tinsmiths came, bringing with them all their tools in baskets, she inquired, “can you straighten out those dents in the tin woodman, and bend him back into shape again, and solder him together where he is broken?” the tinsmiths looked the woodman over carefully and then answered that they thought they could mend him so he would be as good as ever. so they set to work in one of the big yellow rooms of the castle and worked for three days and four nights, hammering and twisting and bending and soldering and polishing and pounding at the legs and body and head of the tin woodman, until at last he was straightened out into his old form, and his joints worked as well as ever. to be sure, there were several patches on him, but the tinsmiths did a good job, and as the woodman was not a vain man he did not mind the patches at all. when, at last, he walked into dorothy’s room and thanked her for rescuing him, he was so pleased that he wept tears of joy, and dorothy had to wipe every tear carefully from his face with her apron, so his joints would not be rusted. at the same time her own tears fell thick and fast at the joy of meeting her old friend again, and these tears did not need to be wiped away. as for the lion, he wiped his eyes so often with the tip of his tail that it became quite wet, and he was obliged to go out into the courtyard and hold it in the sun till it dried. “if we only had the scarecrow with us again,” said the tin woodman, when dorothy had finished telling him everything that had happened, “i should be quite happy.” “we must try to find him,” said the girl. so she called the winkies to help her, and they walked all that day and part of the next until they came to the tall tree in the branches of which the winged monkeys had tossed the scarecrow’s clothes. it was a very tall tree, and the trunk was so smooth that no one could climb it; but the woodman said at once, “i’ll chop it down, and then we can get the scarecrow’s clothes.” now while the tinsmiths had been at work mending the woodman himself, another of the winkies, who was a goldsmith, had made an axe-handle of solid gold and fitted it to the woodman’s axe, instead of the old broken handle. others polished the blade until all the rust was removed and it glistened like burnished silver. as soon as he had spoken, the tin woodman began to chop, and in a short time the tree fell over with a crash, whereupon the scarecrow’s clothes fell out of the branches and rolled off on the ground. dorothy picked them up and had the winkies carry them back to the castle, where they were stuffed with nice, clean straw; and behold! here was the scarecrow, as good as ever, thanking them over and over again for saving him. now that they were reunited, dorothy and her friends spent a few happy days at the yellow castle, where they found everything they needed to make them comfortable. but one day the girl thought of aunt em, and said, “we must go back to oz, and claim his promise.” “yes,” said the woodman, “at last i shall get my heart.” “and i shall get my brains,” added the scarecrow joyfully. “and i shall get my courage,” said the lion thoughtfully. “and i shall get back to kansas,” cried dorothy, clapping her hands. “oh, let us start for the emerald city tomorrow!” this they decided to do. the next day they called the winkies together and bade them good-bye. the winkies were sorry to have them go, and they had grown so fond of the tin woodman that they begged him to stay and rule over them and the yellow land of the west. finding they were determined to go, the winkies gave toto and the lion each a golden collar; and to dorothy they presented a beautiful bracelet studded with diamonds; and to the scarecrow they gave a gold-headed walking stick, to keep him from stumbling; and to the tin woodman they offered a silver oil-can, inlaid with gold and set with precious jewels. every one of the travelers made the winkies a pretty speech in return, and all shook hands with them until their arms ached. dorothy went to the witch’s cupboard to fill her basket with food for the journey, and there she saw the golden cap. she tried it on her own head and found that it fitted her exactly. she did not know anything about the charm of the golden cap, but she saw that it was pretty, so she made up her mind to wear it and carry her sunbonnet in the basket. then, being prepared for the journey, they all started for the emerald city; and the winkies gave them three cheers and many good wishes to carry with them. chapter xiv the winged monkeys you will remember there was no road—not even a pathway—between the castle of the wicked witch and the emerald city. when the four travelers went in search of the witch she had seen them coming, and so sent the winged monkeys to bring them to her. it was much harder to find their way back through the big fields of buttercups and yellow daisies than it was being carried. they knew, of course, they must go straight east, toward the rising sun; and they started off in the right way. but at noon, when the sun was over their heads, they did not know which was east and which was west, and that was the reason they were lost in the great fields. they kept on walking, however, and at night the moon came out and shone brightly. so they lay down among the sweet smelling yellow flowers and slept soundly until morning—all but the scarecrow and the tin woodman. the next morning the sun was behind a cloud, but they started on, as if they were quite sure which way they were going. “if we walk far enough,” said dorothy, “i am sure we shall sometime come to some place.” but day by day passed away, and they still saw nothing before them but the scarlet fields. the scarecrow began to grumble a bit. “we have surely lost our way,” he said, “and unless we find it again in time to reach the emerald city, i shall never get my brains.” “nor i my heart,” declared the tin woodman. “it seems to me i can scarcely wait till i get to oz, and you must admit this is a very long journey.” “you see,” said the cowardly lion, with a whimper, “i haven’t the courage to keep tramping forever, without getting anywhere at all.” then dorothy lost heart. she sat down on the grass and looked at her companions, and they sat down and looked at her, and toto found that for the first time in his life he was too tired to chase a butterfly that flew past his head. so he put out his tongue and panted and looked at dorothy as if to ask what they should do next. “suppose we call the field mice,” she suggested. “they could probably tell us the way to the emerald city.” “to be sure they could,” cried the scarecrow. “why didn’t we think of that before?” dorothy blew the little whistle she had always carried about her neck since the queen of the mice had given it to her. in a few minutes they heard the pattering of tiny feet, and many of the small gray mice came running up to her. among them was the queen herself, who asked, in her squeaky little voice: “what can i do for my friends?” “we have lost our way,” said dorothy. “can you tell us where the emerald city is?” “certainly,” answered the queen; “but it is a great way off, for you have had it at your backs all this time.” then she noticed dorothy’s golden cap, and said, “why don’t you use the charm of the cap, and call the winged monkeys to you? they will carry you to the city of oz in less than an hour.” “i didn’t know there was a charm,” answered dorothy, in surprise. “what is it?” “it is written inside the golden cap,” replied the queen of the mice. “but if you are going to call the winged monkeys we must run away, for they are full of mischief and think it great fun to plague us.” “won’t they hurt me?” asked the girl anxiously. “oh, no. they must obey the wearer of the cap. good-bye!” and she scampered out of sight, with all the mice hurrying after her. dorothy looked inside the golden cap and saw some words written upon the lining. these, she thought, must be the charm, so she read the directions carefully and put the cap upon her head. “ep-pe, pep-pe, kak-ke!” she said, standing on her left foot. “what did you say?” asked the scarecrow, who did not know what she was doing. “hil-lo, hol-lo, hel-lo!” dorothy went on, standing this time on her right foot. “hello!” replied the tin woodman calmly. “ziz-zy, zuz-zy, zik!” said dorothy, who was now standing on both feet. this ended the saying of the charm, and they heard a great chattering and flapping of wings, as the band of winged monkeys flew up to them. the king bowed low before dorothy, and asked, “what is your command?” “we wish to go to the emerald city,” said the child, “and we have lost our way.” “we will carry you,” replied the king, and no sooner had he spoken than two of the monkeys caught dorothy in their arms and flew away with her. others took the scarecrow and the woodman and the lion, and one little monkey seized toto and flew after them, although the dog tried hard to bite him. the scarecrow and the tin woodman were rather frightened at first, for they remembered how badly the winged monkeys had treated them before; but they saw that no harm was intended, so they rode through the air quite cheerfully, and had a fine time looking at the pretty gardens and woods far below them. dorothy found herself riding easily between two of the biggest monkeys, one of them the king himself. they had made a chair of their hands and were careful not to hurt her. “why do you have to obey the charm of the golden cap?” she asked. “that is a long story,” answered the king, with a winged laugh; “but as we have a long journey before us, i will pass the time by telling you about it, if you wish.” “i shall be glad to hear it,” she replied. “once,” began the leader, “we were a free people, living happily in the great forest, flying from tree to tree, eating nuts and fruit, and doing just as we pleased without calling anybody master. perhaps some of us were rather too full of mischief at times, flying down to pull the tails of the animals that had no wings, chasing birds, and throwing nuts at the people who walked in the forest. but we were careless and happy and full of fun, and enjoyed every minute of the day. this was many years ago, long before oz came out of the clouds to rule over this land. “there lived here then, away at the north, a beautiful princess, who was also a powerful sorceress. all her magic was used to help the people, and she was never known to hurt anyone who was good. her name was gayelette, and she lived in a handsome palace built from great blocks of ruby. everyone loved her, but her greatest sorrow was that she could find no one to love in return, since all the men were much too stupid and ugly to mate with one so beautiful and wise. at last, however, she found a boy who was handsome and manly and wise beyond his years. gayelette made up her mind that when he grew to be a man she would make him her husband, so she took him to her ruby palace and used all her magic powers to make him as strong and good and lovely as any woman could wish. when he grew to manhood, quelala, as he was called, was said to be the best and wisest man in all the land, while his manly beauty was so great that gayelette loved him dearly, and hastened to make everything ready for the wedding. “my grandfather was at that time the king of the winged monkeys which lived in the forest near gayelette’s palace, and the old fellow loved a joke better than a good dinner. one day, just before the wedding, my grandfather was flying out with his band when he saw quelala walking beside the river. he was dressed in a rich costume of pink silk and purple velvet, and my grandfather thought he would see what he could do. at his word the band flew down and seized quelala, carried him in their arms until they were over the middle of the river, and then dropped him into the water. “‘swim out, my fine fellow,’ cried my grandfather, ‘and see if the water has spotted your clothes.’ quelala was much too wise not to swim, and he was not in the least spoiled by all his good fortune. he laughed, when he came to the top of the water, and swam in to shore. but when gayelette came running out to him she found his silks and velvet all ruined by the river. “the princess was angry, and she knew, of course, who did it. she had all the winged monkeys brought before her, and she said at first that their wings should be tied and they should be treated as they had treated quelala, and dropped in the river. but my grandfather pleaded hard, for he knew the monkeys would drown in the river with their wings tied, and quelala said a kind word for them also; so that gayelette finally spared them, on condition that the winged monkeys should ever after do three times the bidding of the owner of the golden cap. this cap had been made for a wedding present to quelala, and it is said to have cost the princess half her kingdom. of course my grandfather and all the other monkeys at once agreed to the condition, and that is how it happens that we are three times the slaves of the owner of the golden cap, whosoever he may be.” “and what became of them?” asked dorothy, who had been greatly interested in the story. “quelala being the first owner of the golden cap,” replied the monkey, “he was the first to lay his wishes upon us. as his bride could not bear the sight of us, he called us all to him in the forest after he had married her and ordered us always to keep where she could never again set eyes on a winged monkey, which we were glad to do, for we were all afraid of her. “this was all we ever had to do until the golden cap fell into the hands of the wicked witch of the west, who made us enslave the winkies, and afterward drive oz himself out of the land of the west. now the golden cap is yours, and three times you have the right to lay your wishes upon us.” as the monkey king finished his story dorothy looked down and saw the green, shining walls of the emerald city before them. she wondered at the rapid flight of the monkeys, but was glad the journey was over. the strange creatures set the travelers down carefully before the gate of the city, the king bowed low to dorothy, and then flew swiftly away, followed by all his band. “that was a good ride,” said the little girl. “yes, and a quick way out of our troubles,” replied the lion. “how lucky it was you brought away that wonderful cap!” chapter xv the discovery of oz, the terrible the four travelers walked up to the great gate of emerald city and rang the bell. after ringing several times, it was opened by the same guardian of the gates they had met before. “what! are you back again?” he asked, in surprise. “do you not see us?” answered the scarecrow. “but i thought you had gone to visit the wicked witch of the west.” “we did visit her,” said the scarecrow. “and she let you go again?” asked the man, in wonder. “she could not help it, for she is melted,” explained the scarecrow. “melted! well, that is good news, indeed,” said the man. “who melted her?” “it was dorothy,” said the lion gravely. “good gracious!” exclaimed the man, and he bowed very low indeed before her. then he led them into his little room and locked the spectacles from the great box on all their eyes, just as he had done before. afterward they passed on through the gate into the emerald city. when the people heard from the guardian of the gates that dorothy had melted the wicked witch of the west, they all gathered around the travelers and followed them in a great crowd to the palace of oz. the soldier with the green whiskers was still on guard before the door, but he let them in at once, and they were again met by the beautiful green girl, who showed each of them to their old rooms at once, so they might rest until the great oz was ready to receive them. the soldier had the news carried straight to oz that dorothy and the other travelers had come back again, after destroying the wicked witch; but oz made no reply. they thought the great wizard would send for them at once, but he did not. they had no word from him the next day, nor the next, nor the next. the waiting was tiresome and wearing, and at last they grew vexed that oz should treat them in so poor a fashion, after sending them to undergo hardships and slavery. so the scarecrow at last asked the green girl to take another message to oz, saying if he did not let them in to see him at once they would call the winged monkeys to help them, and find out whether he kept his promises or not. when the wizard was given this message he was so frightened that he sent word for them to come to the throne room at four minutes after nine o’clock the next morning. he had once met the winged monkeys in the land of the west, and he did not wish to meet them again. the four travelers passed a sleepless night, each thinking of the gift oz had promised to bestow on him. dorothy fell asleep only once, and then she dreamed she was in kansas, where aunt em was telling her how glad she was to have her little girl at home again. promptly at nine o’clock the next morning the green-whiskered soldier came to them, and four minutes later they all went into the throne room of the great oz. of course each one of them expected to see the wizard in the shape he had taken before, and all were greatly surprised when they looked about and saw no one at all in the room. they kept close to the door and closer to one another, for the stillness of the empty room was more dreadful than any of the forms they had seen oz take. presently they heard a solemn voice, that seemed to come from somewhere near the top of the great dome, and it said: “i am oz, the great and terrible. why do you seek me?” they looked again in every part of the room, and then, seeing no one, dorothy asked, “where are you?” “i am everywhere,” answered the voice, “but to the eyes of common mortals i am invisible. i will now seat myself upon my throne, that you may converse with me.” indeed, the voice seemed just then to come straight from the throne itself; so they walked toward it and stood in a row while dorothy said: “we have come to claim our promise, o oz.” “what promise?” asked oz. “you promised to send me back to kansas when the wicked witch was destroyed,” said the girl. “and you promised to give me brains,” said the scarecrow. “and you promised to give me a heart,” said the tin woodman. “and you promised to give me courage,” said the cowardly lion. “is the wicked witch really destroyed?” asked the voice, and dorothy thought it trembled a little. “yes,” she answered, “i melted her with a bucket of water.” “dear me,” said the voice, “how sudden! well, come to me tomorrow, for i must have time to think it over.” “you’ve had plenty of time already,” said the tin woodman angrily. “we shan’t wait a day longer,” said the scarecrow. “you must keep your promises to us!” exclaimed dorothy. the lion thought it might be as well to frighten the wizard, so he gave a large, loud roar, which was so fierce and dreadful that toto jumped away from him in alarm and tipped over the screen that stood in a corner. as it fell with a crash they looked that way, and the next moment all of them were filled with wonder. for they saw, standing in just the spot the screen had hidden, a little old man, with a bald head and a wrinkled face, who seemed to be as much surprised as they were. the tin woodman, raising his axe, rushed toward the little man and cried out, “who are you?” “i am oz, the great and terrible,” said the little man, in a trembling voice. “but don’t strike me—please don’t—and i’ll do anything you want me to.” our friends looked at him in surprise and dismay. “i thought oz was a great head,” said dorothy. “and i thought oz was a lovely lady,” said the scarecrow. “and i thought oz was a terrible beast,” said the tin woodman. “and i thought oz was a ball of fire,” exclaimed the lion. “no, you are all wrong,” said the little man meekly. “i have been making believe.” “making believe!” cried dorothy. “are you not a great wizard?” “hush, my dear,” he said. “don’t speak so loud, or you will be overheard—and i should be ruined. i’m supposed to be a great wizard.” “and aren’t you?” she asked. “not a bit of it, my dear; i’m just a common man.” “you’re more than that,” said the scarecrow, in a grieved tone; “you’re a humbug.” “exactly so!” declared the little man, rubbing his hands together as if it pleased him. “i am a humbug.” “but this is terrible,” said the tin woodman. “how shall i ever get my heart?” “or i my courage?” asked the lion. “or i my brains?” wailed the scarecrow, wiping the tears from his eyes with his coat sleeve. “my dear friends,” said oz, “i pray you not to speak of these little things. think of me, and the terrible trouble i’m in at being found out.” “doesn’t anyone else know you’re a humbug?” asked dorothy. “no one knows it but you four—and myself,” replied oz. “i have fooled everyone so long that i thought i should never be found out. it was a great mistake my ever letting you into the throne room. usually i will not see even my subjects, and so they believe i am something terrible.” “but, i don’t understand,” said dorothy, in bewilderment. “how was it that you appeared to me as a great head?” “that was one of my tricks,” answered oz. “step this way, please, and i will tell you all about it.” he led the way to a small chamber in the rear of the throne room, and they all followed him. he pointed to one corner, in which lay the great head, made out of many thicknesses of paper, and with a carefully painted face. “this i hung from the ceiling by a wire,” said oz. “i stood behind the screen and pulled a thread, to make the eyes move and the mouth open.” “but how about the voice?” she inquired. “oh, i am a ventriloquist,” said the little man. “i can throw the sound of my voice wherever i wish, so that you thought it was coming out of the head. here are the other things i used to deceive you.” he showed the scarecrow the dress and the mask he had worn when he seemed to be the lovely lady. and the tin woodman saw that his terrible beast was nothing but a lot of skins, sewn together, with slats to keep their sides out. as for the ball of fire, the false wizard had hung that also from the ceiling. it was really a ball of cotton, but when oil was poured upon it the ball burned fiercely. “really,” said the scarecrow, “you ought to be ashamed of yourself for being such a humbug.” “i am—i certainly am,” answered the little man sorrowfully; “but it was the only thing i could do. sit down, please, there are plenty of chairs; and i will tell you my story.” so they sat down and listened while he told the following tale. “i was born in omaha—” “why, that isn’t very far from kansas!” cried dorothy. “no, but it’s farther from here,” he said, shaking his head at her sadly. “when i grew up i became a ventriloquist, and at that i was very well trained by a great master. i can imitate any kind of a bird or beast.” here he mewed so like a kitten that toto pricked up his ears and looked everywhere to see where she was. “after a time,” continued oz, “i tired of that, and became a balloonist.” “what is that?” asked dorothy. “a man who goes up in a balloon on circus day, so as to draw a crowd of people together and get them to pay to see the circus,” he explained. “oh,” she said, “i know.” “well, one day i went up in a balloon and the ropes got twisted, so that i couldn’t come down again. it went way up above the clouds, so far that a current of air struck it and carried it many, many miles away. for a day and a night i traveled through the air, and on the morning of the second day i awoke and found the balloon floating over a strange and beautiful country. “it came down gradually, and i was not hurt a bit. but i found myself in the midst of a strange people, who, seeing me come from the clouds, thought i was a great wizard. of course i let them think so, because they were afraid of me, and promised to do anything i wished them to. “just to amuse myself, and keep the good people busy, i ordered them to build this city, and my palace; and they did it all willingly and well. then i thought, as the country was so green and beautiful, i would call it the emerald city; and to make the name fit better i put green spectacles on all the people, so that everything they saw was green.” “but isn’t everything here green?” asked dorothy. “no more than in any other city,” replied oz; “but when you wear green spectacles, why of course everything you see looks green to you. the emerald city was built a great many years ago, for i was a young man when the balloon brought me here, and i am a very old man now. but my people have worn green glasses on their eyes so long that most of them think it really is an emerald city, and it certainly is a beautiful place, abounding in jewels and precious metals, and every good thing that is needed to make one happy. i have been good to the people, and they like me; but ever since this palace was built, i have shut myself up and would not see any of them. “one of my greatest fears was the witches, for while i had no magical powers at all i soon found out that the witches were really able to do wonderful things. there were four of them in this country, and they ruled the people who live in the north and south and east and west. fortunately, the witches of the north and south were good, and i knew they would do me no harm; but the witches of the east and west were terribly wicked, and had they not thought i was more powerful than they themselves, they would surely have destroyed me. as it was, i lived in deadly fear of them for many years; so you can imagine how pleased i was when i heard your house had fallen on the wicked witch of the east. when you came to me, i was willing to promise anything if you would only do away with the other witch; but, now that you have melted her, i am ashamed to say that i cannot keep my promises.” “i think you are a very bad man,” said dorothy. “oh, no, my dear; i’m really a very good man, but i’m a very bad wizard, i must admit.” “can’t you give me brains?” asked the scarecrow. “you don’t need them. you are learning something every day. a baby has brains, but it doesn’t know much. experience is the only thing that brings knowledge, and the longer you are on earth the more experience you are sure to get.” “that may all be true,” said the scarecrow, “but i shall be very unhappy unless you give me brains.” the false wizard looked at him carefully. “well,” he said with a sigh, “i’m not much of a magician, as i said; but if you will come to me tomorrow morning, i will stuff your head with brains. i cannot tell you how to use them, however; you must find that out for yourself.” “oh, thank you—thank you!” cried the scarecrow. “i’ll find a way to use them, never fear!” “but how about my courage?” asked the lion anxiously. “you have plenty of courage, i am sure,” answered oz. “all you need is confidence in yourself. there is no living thing that is not afraid when it faces danger. the true courage is in facing danger when you are afraid, and that kind of courage you have in plenty.” “perhaps i have, but i’m scared just the same,” said the lion. “i shall really be very unhappy unless you give me the sort of courage that makes one forget he is afraid.” “very well, i will give you that sort of courage tomorrow,” replied oz. “how about my heart?” asked the tin woodman. “why, as for that,” answered oz, “i think you are wrong to want a heart. it makes most people unhappy. if you only knew it, you are in luck not to have a heart.” “that must be a matter of opinion,” said the tin woodman. “for my part, i will bear all the unhappiness without a murmur, if you will give me the heart.” “very well,” answered oz meekly. “come to me tomorrow and you shall have a heart. i have played wizard for so many years that i may as well continue the part a little longer.” “and now,” said dorothy, “how am i to get back to kansas?” “we shall have to think about that,” replied the little man. “give me two or three days to consider the matter and i’ll try to find a way to carry you over the desert. in the meantime you shall all be treated as my guests, and while you live in the palace my people will wait upon you and obey your slightest wish. there is only one thing i ask in return for my help—such as it is. you must keep my secret and tell no one i am a humbug.” they agreed to say nothing of what they had learned, and went back to their rooms in high spirits. even dorothy had hope that “the great and terrible humbug,” as she called him, would find a way to send her back to kansas, and if he did she was willing to forgive him everything. chapter xvi the magic art of the great humbug next morning the scarecrow said to his friends: “congratulate me. i am going to oz to get my brains at last. when i return i shall be as other men are.” “i have always liked you as you were,” said dorothy simply. “it is kind of you to like a scarecrow,” he replied. “but surely you will think more of me when you hear the splendid thoughts my new brain is going to turn out.” then he said good-bye to them all in a cheerful voice and went to the throne room, where he rapped upon the door. “come in,” said oz. the scarecrow went in and found the little man sitting down by the window, engaged in deep thought. “i have come for my brains,” remarked the scarecrow, a little uneasily. “oh, yes; sit down in that chair, please,” replied oz. “you must excuse me for taking your head off, but i shall have to do it in order to put your brains in their proper place.” “that’s all right,” said the scarecrow. “you are quite welcome to take my head off, as long as it will be a better one when you put it on again.” so the wizard unfastened his head and emptied out the straw. then he entered the back room and took up a measure of bran, which he mixed with a great many pins and needles. having shaken them together thoroughly, he filled the top of the scarecrow’s head with the mixture and stuffed the rest of the space with straw, to hold it in place. when he had fastened the scarecrow’s head on his body again he said to him, “hereafter you will be a great man, for i have given you a lot of bran-new brains.” the scarecrow was both pleased and proud at the fulfillment of his greatest wish, and having thanked oz warmly he went back to his friends. dorothy looked at him curiously. his head was quite bulged out at the top with brains. “how do you feel?” she asked. “i feel wise indeed,” he answered earnestly. “when i get used to my brains i shall know everything.” “why are those needles and pins sticking out of your head?” asked the tin woodman. “that is proof that he is sharp,” remarked the lion. “well, i must go to oz and get my heart,” said the woodman. so he walked to the throne room and knocked at the door. “come in,” called oz, and the woodman entered and said, “i have come for my heart.” “very well,” answered the little man. “but i shall have to cut a hole in your breast, so i can put your heart in the right place. i hope it won’t hurt you.” “oh, no,” answered the woodman. “i shall not feel it at all.” so oz brought a pair of tinsmith’s shears and cut a small, square hole in the left side of the tin woodman’s breast. then, going to a chest of drawers, he took out a pretty heart, made entirely of silk and stuffed with sawdust. “isn’t it a beauty?” he asked. “it is, indeed!” replied the woodman, who was greatly pleased. “but is it a kind heart?” “oh, very!” answered oz. he put the heart in the woodman’s breast and then replaced the square of tin, soldering it neatly together where it had been cut. “there,” said he; “now you have a heart that any man might be proud of. i’m sorry i had to put a patch on your breast, but it really couldn’t be helped.” “never mind the patch,” exclaimed the happy woodman. “i am very grateful to you, and shall never forget your kindness.” “don’t speak of it,” replied oz. then the tin woodman went back to his friends, who wished him every joy on account of his good fortune. the lion now walked to the throne room and knocked at the door. “come in,” said oz. “i have come for my courage,” announced the lion, entering the room. “very well,” answered the little man; “i will get it for you.” he went to a cupboard and reaching up to a high shelf took down a square green bottle, the contents of which he poured into a green-gold dish, beautifully carved. placing this before the cowardly lion, who sniffed at it as if he did not like it, the wizard said: “drink.” “what is it?” asked the lion. “well,” answered oz, “if it were inside of you, it would be courage. you know, of course, that courage is always inside one; so that this really cannot be called courage until you have swallowed it. therefore i advise you to drink it as soon as possible.” the lion hesitated no longer, but drank till the dish was empty. “how do you feel now?” asked oz. “full of courage,” replied the lion, who went joyfully back to his friends to tell them of his good fortune. oz, left to himself, smiled to think of his success in giving the scarecrow and the tin woodman and the lion exactly what they thought they wanted. “how can i help being a humbug,” he said, “when all these people make me do things that everybody knows can’t be done? it was easy to make the scarecrow and the lion and the woodman happy, because they imagined i could do anything. but it will take more than imagination to carry dorothy back to kansas, and i’m sure i don’t know how it can be done.” chapter xvii how the balloon was launched for three days dorothy heard nothing from oz. these were sad days for the little girl, although her friends were all quite happy and contented. the scarecrow told them there were wonderful thoughts in his head; but he would not say what they were because he knew no one could understand them but himself. when the tin woodman walked about he felt his heart rattling around in his breast; and he told dorothy he had discovered it to be a kinder and more tender heart than the one he had owned when he was made of flesh. the lion declared he was afraid of nothing on earth, and would gladly face an army or a dozen of the fierce kalidahs. thus each of the little party was satisfied except dorothy, who longed more than ever to get back to kansas. on the fourth day, to her great joy, oz sent for her, and when she entered the throne room he greeted her pleasantly: “sit down, my dear; i think i have found the way to get you out of this country.” “and back to kansas?” she asked eagerly. “well, i’m not sure about kansas,” said oz, “for i haven’t the faintest notion which way it lies. but the first thing to do is to cross the desert, and then it should be easy to find your way home.” “how can i cross the desert?” she inquired. “well, i’ll tell you what i think,” said the little man. “you see, when i came to this country it was in a balloon. you also came through the air, being carried by a cyclone. so i believe the best way to get across the desert will be through the air. now, it is quite beyond my powers to make a cyclone; but i’ve been thinking the matter over, and i believe i can make a balloon.” “how?” asked dorothy. “a balloon,” said oz, “is made of silk, which is coated with glue to keep the gas in it. i have plenty of silk in the palace, so it will be no trouble to make the balloon. but in all this country there is no gas to fill the balloon with, to make it float.” “if it won’t float,” remarked dorothy, “it will be of no use to us.” “true,” answered oz. “but there is another way to make it float, which is to fill it with hot air. hot air isn’t as good as gas, for if the air should get cold the balloon would come down in the desert, and we should be lost.” “we!” exclaimed the girl. “are you going with me?” “yes, of course,” replied oz. “i am tired of being such a humbug. if i should go out of this palace my people would soon discover i am not a wizard, and then they would be vexed with me for having deceived them. so i have to stay shut up in these rooms all day, and it gets tiresome. i’d much rather go back to kansas with you and be in a circus again.” “i shall be glad to have your company,” said dorothy. “thank you,” he answered. “now, if you will help me sew the silk together, we will begin to work on our balloon.” so dorothy took a needle and thread, and as fast as oz cut the strips of silk into proper shape the girl sewed them neatly together. first there was a strip of light green silk, then a strip of dark green and then a strip of emerald green; for oz had a fancy to make the balloon in different shades of the color about them. it took three days to sew all the strips together, but when it was finished they had a big bag of green silk more than twenty feet long. then oz painted it on the inside with a coat of thin glue, to make it airtight, after which he announced that the balloon was ready. “but we must have a basket to ride in,” he said. so he sent the soldier with the green whiskers for a big clothes basket, which he fastened with many ropes to the bottom of the balloon. when it was all ready, oz sent word to his people that he was going to make a visit to a great brother wizard who lived in the clouds. the news spread rapidly throughout the city and everyone came to see the wonderful sight. oz ordered the balloon carried out in front of the palace, and the people gazed upon it with much curiosity. the tin woodman had chopped a big pile of wood, and now he made a fire of it, and oz held the bottom of the balloon over the fire so that the hot air that arose from it would be caught in the silken bag. gradually the balloon swelled out and rose into the air, until finally the basket just touched the ground. then oz got into the basket and said to all the people in a loud voice: “i am now going away to make a visit. while i am gone the scarecrow will rule over you. i command you to obey him as you would me.” the balloon was by this time tugging hard at the rope that held it to the ground, for the air within it was hot, and this made it so much lighter in weight than the air without that it pulled hard to rise into the sky. “come, dorothy!” cried the wizard. “hurry up, or the balloon will fly away.” “i can’t find toto anywhere,” replied dorothy, who did not wish to leave her little dog behind. toto had run into the crowd to bark at a kitten, and dorothy at last found him. she picked him up and ran towards the balloon. she was within a few steps of it, and oz was holding out his hands to help her into the basket, when, crack! went the ropes, and the balloon rose into the air without her. “come back!” she screamed. “i want to go, too!” “i can’t come back, my dear,” called oz from the basket. “good-bye!” “good-bye!” shouted everyone, and all eyes were turned upward to where the wizard was riding in the basket, rising every moment farther and farther into the sky. and that was the last any of them ever saw of oz, the wonderful wizard, though he may have reached omaha safely, and be there now, for all we know. but the people remembered him lovingly, and said to one another: “oz was always our friend. when he was here he built for us this beautiful emerald city, and now he is gone he has left the wise scarecrow to rule over us.” still, for many days they grieved over the loss of the wonderful wizard, and would not be comforted. chapter xviii away to the south dorothy wept bitterly at the passing of her hope to get home to kansas again; but when she thought it all over she was glad she had not gone up in a balloon. and she also felt sorry at losing oz, and so did her companions. the tin woodman came to her and said: “truly i should be ungrateful if i failed to mourn for the man who gave me my lovely heart. i should like to cry a little because oz is gone, if you will kindly wipe away my tears, so that i shall not rust.” “with pleasure,” she answered, and brought a towel at once. then the tin woodman wept for several minutes, and she watched the tears carefully and wiped them away with the towel. when he had finished, he thanked her kindly and oiled himself thoroughly with his jeweled oil-can, to guard against mishap. the scarecrow was now the ruler of the emerald city, and although he was not a wizard the people were proud of him. “for,” they said, “there is not another city in all the world that is ruled by a stuffed man.” and, so far as they knew, they were quite right. the morning after the balloon had gone up with oz, the four travelers met in the throne room and talked matters over. the scarecrow sat in the big throne and the others stood respectfully before him. “we are not so unlucky,” said the new ruler, “for this palace and the emerald city belong to us, and we can do just as we please. when i remember that a short time ago i was up on a pole in a farmer’s cornfield, and that now i am the ruler of this beautiful city, i am quite satisfied with my lot.” “i also,” said the tin woodman, “am well-pleased with my new heart; and, really, that was the only thing i wished in all the world.” “for my part, i am content in knowing i am as brave as any beast that ever lived, if not braver,” said the lion modestly. “if dorothy would only be contented to live in the emerald city,” continued the scarecrow, “we might all be happy together.” “but i don’t want to live here,” cried dorothy. “i want to go to kansas, and live with aunt em and uncle henry.” “well, then, what can be done?” inquired the woodman. the scarecrow decided to think, and he thought so hard that the pins and needles began to stick out of his brains. finally he said: “why not call the winged monkeys, and ask them to carry you over the desert?” “i never thought of that!” said dorothy joyfully. “it’s just the thing. i’ll go at once for the golden cap.” when she brought it into the throne room she spoke the magic words, and soon the band of winged monkeys flew in through the open window and stood beside her. “this is the second time you have called us,” said the monkey king, bowing before the little girl. “what do you wish?” “i want you to fly with me to kansas,” said dorothy. but the monkey king shook his head. “that cannot be done,” he said. “we belong to this country alone, and cannot leave it. there has never been a winged monkey in kansas yet, and i suppose there never will be, for they don’t belong there. we shall be glad to serve you in any way in our power, but we cannot cross the desert. good-bye.” and with another bow, the monkey king spread his wings and flew away through the window, followed by all his band. dorothy was ready to cry with disappointment. “i have wasted the charm of the golden cap to no purpose,” she said, “for the winged monkeys cannot help me.” “it is certainly too bad!” said the tender-hearted woodman. the scarecrow was thinking again, and his head bulged out so horribly that dorothy feared it would burst. “let us call in the soldier with the green whiskers,” he said, “and ask his advice.” so the soldier was summoned and entered the throne room timidly, for while oz was alive he never was allowed to come farther than the door. “this little girl,” said the scarecrow to the soldier, “wishes to cross the desert. how can she do so?” “i cannot tell,” answered the soldier, “for nobody has ever crossed the desert, unless it is oz himself.” “is there no one who can help me?” asked dorothy earnestly. “glinda might,” he suggested. “who is glinda?” inquired the scarecrow. “the witch of the south. she is the most powerful of all the witches, and rules over the quadlings. besides, her castle stands on the edge of the desert, so she may know a way to cross it.” “glinda is a good witch, isn’t she?” asked the child. “the quadlings think she is good,” said the soldier, “and she is kind to everyone. i have heard that glinda is a beautiful woman, who knows how to keep young in spite of the many years she has lived.” “how can i get to her castle?” asked dorothy. “the road is straight to the south,” he answered, “but it is said to be full of dangers to travelers. there are wild beasts in the woods, and a race of queer men who do not like strangers to cross their country. for this reason none of the quadlings ever come to the emerald city.” the soldier then left them and the scarecrow said: “it seems, in spite of dangers, that the best thing dorothy can do is to travel to the land of the south and ask glinda to help her. for, of course, if dorothy stays here she will never get back to kansas.” “you must have been thinking again,” remarked the tin woodman. “i have,” said the scarecrow. “i shall go with dorothy,” declared the lion, “for i am tired of your city and long for the woods and the country again. i am really a wild beast, you know. besides, dorothy will need someone to protect her.” “that is true,” agreed the woodman. “my axe may be of service to her; so i also will go with her to the land of the south.” “when shall we start?” asked the scarecrow. “are you going?” they asked, in surprise. “certainly. if it wasn’t for dorothy i should never have had brains. she lifted me from the pole in the cornfield and brought me to the emerald city. so my good luck is all due to her, and i shall never leave her until she starts back to kansas for good and all.” “thank you,” said dorothy gratefully. “you are all very kind to me. but i should like to start as soon as possible.” “we shall go tomorrow morning,” returned the scarecrow. “so now let us all get ready, for it will be a long journey.” chapter xix attacked by the fighting trees the next morning dorothy kissed the pretty green girl good-bye, and they all shook hands with the soldier with the green whiskers, who had walked with them as far as the gate. when the guardian of the gate saw them again he wondered greatly that they could leave the beautiful city to get into new trouble. but he at once unlocked their spectacles, which he put back into the green box, and gave them many good wishes to carry with them. “you are now our ruler,” he said to the scarecrow; “so you must come back to us as soon as possible.” “i certainly shall if i am able,” the scarecrow replied; “but i must help dorothy to get home, first.” as dorothy bade the good-natured guardian a last farewell she said: “i have been very kindly treated in your lovely city, and everyone has been good to me. i cannot tell you how grateful i am.” “don’t try, my dear,” he answered. “we should like to keep you with us, but if it is your wish to return to kansas, i hope you will find a way.” he then opened the gate of the outer wall, and they walked forth and started upon their journey. the sun shone brightly as our friends turned their faces toward the land of the south. they were all in the best of spirits, and laughed and chatted together. dorothy was once more filled with the hope of getting home, and the scarecrow and the tin woodman were glad to be of use to her. as for the lion, he sniffed the fresh air with delight and whisked his tail from side to side in pure joy at being in the country again, while toto ran around them and chased the moths and butterflies, barking merrily all the time. “city life does not agree with me at all,” remarked the lion, as they walked along at a brisk pace. “i have lost much flesh since i lived there, and now i am anxious for a chance to show the other beasts how courageous i have grown.” they now turned and took a last look at the emerald city. all they could see was a mass of towers and steeples behind the green walls, and high up above everything the spires and dome of the palace of oz. “oz was not such a bad wizard, after all,” said the tin woodman, as he felt his heart rattling around in his breast. “he knew how to give me brains, and very good brains, too,” said the scarecrow. “if oz had taken a dose of the same courage he gave me,” added the lion, “he would have been a brave man.” dorothy said nothing. oz had not kept the promise he made her, but he had done his best, so she forgave him. as he said, he was a good man, even if he was a bad wizard. the first day’s journey was through the green fields and bright flowers that stretched about the emerald city on every side. they slept that night on the grass, with nothing but the stars over them; and they rested very well indeed. in the morning they traveled on until they came to a thick wood. there was no way of going around it, for it seemed to extend to the right and left as far as they could see; and, besides, they did not dare change the direction of their journey for fear of getting lost. so they looked for the place where it would be easiest to get into the forest. the scarecrow, who was in the lead, finally discovered a big tree with such wide-spreading branches that there was room for the party to pass underneath. so he walked forward to the tree, but just as he came under the first branches they bent down and twined around him, and the next minute he was raised from the ground and flung headlong among his fellow travelers. this did not hurt the scarecrow, but it surprised him, and he looked rather dizzy when dorothy picked him up. “here is another space between the trees,” called the lion. “let me try it first,” said the scarecrow, “for it doesn’t hurt me to get thrown about.” he walked up to another tree, as he spoke, but its branches immediately seized him and tossed him back again. “this is strange,” exclaimed dorothy. “what shall we do?” “the trees seem to have made up their minds to fight us, and stop our journey,” remarked the lion. “i believe i will try it myself,” said the woodman, and shouldering his axe, he marched up to the first tree that had handled the scarecrow so roughly. when a big branch bent down to seize him the woodman chopped at it so fiercely that he cut it in two. at once the tree began shaking all its branches as if in pain, and the tin woodman passed safely under it. “come on!” he shouted to the others. “be quick!” they all ran forward and passed under the tree without injury, except toto, who was caught by a small branch and shaken until he howled. but the woodman promptly chopped off the branch and set the little dog free. the other trees of the forest did nothing to keep them back, so they made up their minds that only the first row of trees could bend down their branches, and that probably these were the policemen of the forest, and given this wonderful power in order to keep strangers out of it. the four travelers walked with ease through the trees until they came to the farther edge of the wood. then, to their surprise, they found before them a high wall which seemed to be made of white china. it was smooth, like the surface of a dish, and higher than their heads. “what shall we do now?” asked dorothy. “i will make a ladder,” said the tin woodman, “for we certainly must climb over the wall.” chapter xx the dainty china country while the woodman was making a ladder from wood which he found in the forest dorothy lay down and slept, for she was tired by the long walk. the lion also curled himself up to sleep and toto lay beside him. the scarecrow watched the woodman while he worked, and said to him: “i cannot think why this wall is here, nor what it is made of.” “rest your brains and do not worry about the wall,” replied the woodman. “when we have climbed over it, we shall know what is on the other side.” after a time the ladder was finished. it looked clumsy, but the tin woodman was sure it was strong and would answer their purpose. the scarecrow waked dorothy and the lion and toto, and told them that the ladder was ready. the scarecrow climbed up the ladder first, but he was so awkward that dorothy had to follow close behind and keep him from falling off. when he got his head over the top of the wall the scarecrow said, “oh, my!” “go on,” exclaimed dorothy. so the scarecrow climbed farther up and sat down on the top of the wall, and dorothy put her head over and cried, “oh, my!” just as the scarecrow had done. then toto came up, and immediately began to bark, but dorothy made him be still. the lion climbed the ladder next, and the tin woodman came last; but both of them cried, “oh, my!” as soon as they looked over the wall. when they were all sitting in a row on the top of the wall, they looked down and saw a strange sight. before them was a great stretch of country having a floor as smooth and shining and white as the bottom of a big platter. scattered around were many houses made entirely of china and painted in the brightest colors. these houses were quite small, the biggest of them reaching only as high as dorothy’s waist. there were also pretty little barns, with china fences around them; and many cows and sheep and horses and pigs and chickens, all made of china, were standing about in groups. but the strangest of all were the people who lived in this queer country. there were milkmaids and shepherdesses, with brightly colored bodices and golden spots all over their gowns; and princesses with most gorgeous frocks of silver and gold and purple; and shepherds dressed in knee breeches with pink and yellow and blue stripes down them, and golden buckles on their shoes; and princes with jeweled crowns upon their heads, wearing ermine robes and satin doublets; and funny clowns in ruffled gowns, with round red spots upon their cheeks and tall, pointed caps. and, strangest of all, these people were all made of china, even to their clothes, and were so small that the tallest of them was no higher than dorothy’s knee. no one did so much as look at the travelers at first, except one little purple china dog with an extra-large head, which came to the wall and barked at them in a tiny voice, afterwards running away again. “how shall we get down?” asked dorothy. they found the ladder so heavy they could not pull it up, so the scarecrow fell off the wall and the others jumped down upon him so that the hard floor would not hurt their feet. of course they took pains not to light on his head and get the pins in their feet. when all were safely down they picked up the scarecrow, whose body was quite flattened out, and patted his straw into shape again. “we must cross this strange place in order to get to the other side,” said dorothy, “for it would be unwise for us to go any other way except due south.” they began walking through the country of the china people, and the first thing they came to was a china milkmaid milking a china cow. as they drew near, the cow suddenly gave a kick and kicked over the stool, the pail, and even the milkmaid herself, and all fell on the china ground with a great clatter. dorothy was shocked to see that the cow had broken her leg off, and that the pail was lying in several small pieces, while the poor milkmaid had a nick in her left elbow. “there!” cried the milkmaid angrily. “see what you have done! my cow has broken her leg, and i must take her to the mender’s shop and have it glued on again. what do you mean by coming here and frightening my cow?” “i’m very sorry,” returned dorothy. “please forgive us.” but the pretty milkmaid was much too vexed to make any answer. she picked up the leg sulkily and led her cow away, the poor animal limping on three legs. as she left them the milkmaid cast many reproachful glances over her shoulder at the clumsy strangers, holding her nicked elbow close to her side. dorothy was quite grieved at this mishap. “we must be very careful here,” said the kind-hearted woodman, “or we may hurt these pretty little people so they will never get over it.” a little farther on dorothy met a most beautifully dressed young princess, who stopped short as she saw the strangers and started to run away. dorothy wanted to see more of the princess, so she ran after her. but the china girl cried out: “don’t chase me! don’t chase me!” she had such a frightened little voice that dorothy stopped and said, “why not?” “because,” answered the princess, also stopping, a safe distance away, “if i run i may fall down and break myself.” “but could you not be mended?” asked the girl. “oh, yes; but one is never so pretty after being mended, you know,” replied the princess. “i suppose not,” said dorothy. “now there is mr. joker, one of our clowns,” continued the china lady, “who is always trying to stand upon his head. he has broken himself so often that he is mended in a hundred places, and doesn’t look at all pretty. here he comes now, so you can see for yourself.” indeed, a jolly little clown came walking toward them, and dorothy could see that in spite of his pretty clothes of red and yellow and green he was completely covered with cracks, running every which way and showing plainly that he had been mended in many places. the clown put his hands in his pockets, and after puffing out his cheeks and nodding his head at them saucily, he said: “my lady fair, why do you stare at poor old mr. joker? you’re quite as stiff and prim as if you’d eaten up a poker!” “be quiet, sir!” said the princess. “can’t you see these are strangers, and should be treated with respect?” “well, that’s respect, i expect,” declared the clown, and immediately stood upon his head. “don’t mind mr. joker,” said the princess to dorothy. “he is considerably cracked in his head, and that makes him foolish.” “oh, i don’t mind him a bit,” said dorothy. “but you are so beautiful,” she continued, “that i am sure i could love you dearly. won’t you let me carry you back to kansas, and stand you on aunt em’s mantel? i could carry you in my basket.” “that would make me very unhappy,” answered the china princess. “you see, here in our country we live contentedly, and can talk and move around as we please. but whenever any of us are taken away our joints at once stiffen, and we can only stand straight and look pretty. of course that is all that is expected of us when we are on mantels and cabinets and drawing-room tables, but our lives are much pleasanter here in our own country.” “i would not make you unhappy for all the world!” exclaimed dorothy. “so i’ll just say good-bye.” “good-bye,” replied the princess. they walked carefully through the china country. the little animals and all the people scampered out of their way, fearing the strangers would break them, and after an hour or so the travelers reached the other side of the country and came to another china wall. it was not so high as the first, however, and by standing upon the lion’s back they all managed to scramble to the top. then the lion gathered his legs under him and jumped on the wall; but just as he jumped, he upset a china church with his tail and smashed it all to pieces. “that was too bad,” said dorothy, “but really i think we were lucky in not doing these little people more harm than breaking a cow’s leg and a church. they are all so brittle!” “they are, indeed,” said the scarecrow, “and i am thankful i am made of straw and cannot be easily damaged. there are worse things in the world than being a scarecrow.” chapter xxi the lion becomes the king of beasts after climbing down from the china wall the travelers found themselves in a disagreeable country, full of bogs and marshes and covered with tall, rank grass. it was difficult to walk without falling into muddy holes, for the grass was so thick that it hid them from sight. however, by carefully picking their way, they got safely along until they reached solid ground. but here the country seemed wilder than ever, and after a long and tiresome walk through the underbrush they entered another forest, where the trees were bigger and older than any they had ever seen. “this forest is perfectly delightful,” declared the lion, looking around him with joy. “never have i seen a more beautiful place.” “it seems gloomy,” said the scarecrow. “not a bit of it,” answered the lion. “i should like to live here all my life. see how soft the dried leaves are under your feet and how rich and green the moss is that clings to these old trees. surely no wild beast could wish a pleasanter home.” “perhaps there are wild beasts in the forest now,” said dorothy. “i suppose there are,” returned the lion, “but i do not see any of them about.” they walked through the forest until it became too dark to go any farther. dorothy and toto and the lion lay down to sleep, while the woodman and the scarecrow kept watch over them as usual. when morning came, they started again. before they had gone far they heard a low rumble, as of the growling of many wild animals. toto whimpered a little, but none of the others was frightened, and they kept along the well-trodden path until they came to an opening in the wood, in which were gathered hundreds of beasts of every variety. there were tigers and elephants and bears and wolves and foxes and all the others in the natural history, and for a moment dorothy was afraid. but the lion explained that the animals were holding a meeting, and he judged by their snarling and growling that they were in great trouble. as he spoke several of the beasts caught sight of him, and at once the great assemblage hushed as if by magic. the biggest of the tigers came up to the lion and bowed, saying: “welcome, o king of beasts! you have come in good time to fight our enemy and bring peace to all the animals of the forest once more.” “what is your trouble?” asked the lion quietly. “we are all threatened,” answered the tiger, “by a fierce enemy which has lately come into this forest. it is a most tremendous monster, like a great spider, with a body as big as an elephant and legs as long as a tree trunk. it has eight of these long legs, and as the monster crawls through the forest he seizes an animal with a leg and drags it to his mouth, where he eats it as a spider does a fly. not one of us is safe while this fierce creature is alive, and we had called a meeting to decide how to take care of ourselves when you came among us.” the lion thought for a moment. “are there any other lions in this forest?” he asked. “no; there were some, but the monster has eaten them all. and, besides, they were none of them nearly so large and brave as you.” “if i put an end to your enemy, will you bow down to me and obey me as king of the forest?” inquired the lion. “we will do that gladly,” returned the tiger; and all the other beasts roared with a mighty roar: “we will!” “where is this great spider of yours now?” asked the lion. “yonder, among the oak trees,” said the tiger, pointing with his forefoot. “take good care of these friends of mine,” said the lion, “and i will go at once to fight the monster.” he bade his comrades good-bye and marched proudly away to do battle with the enemy. the great spider was lying asleep when the lion found him, and it looked so ugly that its foe turned up his nose in disgust. its legs were quite as long as the tiger had said, and its body covered with coarse black hair. it had a great mouth, with a row of sharp teeth a foot long; but its head was joined to the pudgy body by a neck as slender as a wasp’s waist. this gave the lion a hint of the best way to attack the creature, and as he knew it was easier to fight it asleep than awake, he gave a great spring and landed directly upon the monster’s back. then, with one blow of his heavy paw, all armed with sharp claws, he knocked the spider’s head from its body. jumping down, he watched it until the long legs stopped wiggling, when he knew it was quite dead. the lion went back to the opening where the beasts of the forest were waiting for him and said proudly: “you need fear your enemy no longer.” then the beasts bowed down to the lion as their king, and he promised to come back and rule over them as soon as dorothy was safely on her way to kansas. chapter xxii the country of the quadlings the four travelers passed through the rest of the forest in safety, and when they came out from its gloom saw before them a steep hill, covered from top to bottom with great pieces of rock. “that will be a hard climb,” said the scarecrow, “but we must get over the hill, nevertheless.” so he led the way and the others followed. they had nearly reached the first rock when they heard a rough voice cry out, “keep back!” “who are you?” asked the scarecrow. then a head showed itself over the rock and the same voice said, “this hill belongs to us, and we don’t allow anyone to cross it.” “but we must cross it,” said the scarecrow. “we’re going to the country of the quadlings.” “but you shall not!” replied the voice, and there stepped from behind the rock the strangest man the travelers had ever seen. he was quite short and stout and had a big head, which was flat at the top and supported by a thick neck full of wrinkles. but he had no arms at all, and, seeing this, the scarecrow did not fear that so helpless a creature could prevent them from climbing the hill. so he said, “i’m sorry not to do as you wish, but we must pass over your hill whether you like it or not,” and he walked boldly forward. as quick as lightning the man’s head shot forward and his neck stretched out until the top of the head, where it was flat, struck the scarecrow in the middle and sent him tumbling, over and over, down the hill. almost as quickly as it came the head went back to the body, and the man laughed harshly as he said, “it isn’t as easy as you think!” a chorus of boisterous laughter came from the other rocks, and dorothy saw hundreds of the armless hammer-heads upon the hillside, one behind every rock. the lion became quite angry at the laughter caused by the scarecrow’s mishap, and giving a loud roar that echoed like thunder, he dashed up the hill. again a head shot swiftly out, and the great lion went rolling down the hill as if he had been struck by a cannon ball. dorothy ran down and helped the scarecrow to his feet, and the lion came up to her, feeling rather bruised and sore, and said, “it is useless to fight people with shooting heads; no one can withstand them.” “what can we do, then?” she asked. “call the winged monkeys,” suggested the tin woodman. “you have still the right to command them once more.” “very well,” she answered, and putting on the golden cap she uttered the magic words. the monkeys were as prompt as ever, and in a few moments the entire band stood before her. “what are your commands?” inquired the king of the monkeys, bowing low. “carry us over the hill to the country of the quadlings,” answered the girl. “it shall be done,” said the king, and at once the winged monkeys caught the four travelers and toto up in their arms and flew away with them. as they passed over the hill the hammer-heads yelled with vexation, and shot their heads high in the air, but they could not reach the winged monkeys, which carried dorothy and her comrades safely over the hill and set them down in the beautiful country of the quadlings. “this is the last time you can summon us,” said the leader to dorothy; “so good-bye and good luck to you.” “good-bye, and thank you very much,” returned the girl; and the monkeys rose into the air and were out of sight in a twinkling. the country of the quadlings seemed rich and happy. there was field upon field of ripening grain, with well-paved roads running between, and pretty rippling brooks with strong bridges across them. the fences and houses and bridges were all painted bright red, just as they had been painted yellow in the country of the winkies and blue in the country of the munchkins. the quadlings themselves, who were short and fat and looked chubby and good-natured, were dressed all in red, which showed bright against the green grass and the yellowing grain. the monkeys had set them down near a farmhouse, and the four travelers walked up to it and knocked at the door. it was opened by the farmer’s wife, and when dorothy asked for something to eat the woman gave them all a good dinner, with three kinds of cake and four kinds of cookies, and a bowl of milk for toto. “how far is it to the castle of glinda?” asked the child. “it is not a great way,” answered the farmer’s wife. “take the road to the south and you will soon reach it.” thanking the good woman, they started afresh and walked by the fields and across the pretty bridges until they saw before them a very beautiful castle. before the gates were three young girls, dressed in handsome red uniforms trimmed with gold braid; and as dorothy approached, one of them said to her: “why have you come to the south country?” “to see the good witch who rules here,” she answered. “will you take me to her?” “let me have your name, and i will ask glinda if she will receive you.” they told who they were, and the girl soldier went into the castle. after a few moments she came back to say that dorothy and the others were to be admitted at once. chapter xxiii glinda the good witch grants dorothy’s wish before they went to see glinda, however, they were taken to a room of the castle, where dorothy washed her face and combed her hair, and the lion shook the dust out of his mane, and the scarecrow patted himself into his best shape, and the woodman polished his tin and oiled his joints. when they were all quite presentable they followed the soldier girl into a big room where the witch glinda sat upon a throne of rubies. she was both beautiful and young to their eyes. her hair was a rich red in color and fell in flowing ringlets over her shoulders. her dress was pure white but her eyes were blue, and they looked kindly upon the little girl. “what can i do for you, my child?” she asked. dorothy told the witch all her story: how the cyclone had brought her to the land of oz, how she had found her companions, and of the wonderful adventures they had met with. “my greatest wish now,” she added, “is to get back to kansas, for aunt em will surely think something dreadful has happened to me, and that will make her put on mourning; and unless the crops are better this year than they were last, i am sure uncle henry cannot afford it.” glinda leaned forward and kissed the sweet, upturned face of the loving little girl. “bless your dear heart,” she said, “i am sure i can tell you of a way to get back to kansas.” then she added, “but, if i do, you must give me the golden cap.” “willingly!” exclaimed dorothy; “indeed, it is of no use to me now, and when you have it you can command the winged monkeys three times.” “and i think i shall need their service just those three times,” answered glinda, smiling. dorothy then gave her the golden cap, and the witch said to the scarecrow, “what will you do when dorothy has left us?” “i will return to the emerald city,” he replied, “for oz has made me its ruler and the people like me. the only thing that worries me is how to cross the hill of the hammer-heads.” “by means of the golden cap i shall command the winged monkeys to carry you to the gates of the emerald city,” said glinda, “for it would be a shame to deprive the people of so wonderful a ruler.” “am i really wonderful?” asked the scarecrow. “you are unusual,” replied glinda. turning to the tin woodman, she asked, “what will become of you when dorothy leaves this country?” he leaned on his axe and thought a moment. then he said, “the winkies were very kind to me, and wanted me to rule over them after the wicked witch died. i am fond of the winkies, and if i could get back again to the country of the west, i should like nothing better than to rule over them forever.” “my second command to the winged monkeys,” said glinda “will be that they carry you safely to the land of the winkies. your brain may not be so large to look at as those of the scarecrow, but you are really brighter than he is—when you are well polished—and i am sure you will rule the winkies wisely and well.” then the witch looked at the big, shaggy lion and asked, “when dorothy has returned to her own home, what will become of you?” “over the hill of the hammer-heads,” he answered, “lies a grand old forest, and all the beasts that live there have made me their king. if i could only get back to this forest, i would pass my life very happily there.” “my third command to the winged monkeys,” said glinda, “shall be to carry you to your forest. then, having used up the powers of the golden cap, i shall give it to the king of the monkeys, that he and his band may thereafter be free for evermore.” the scarecrow and the tin woodman and the lion now thanked the good witch earnestly for her kindness; and dorothy exclaimed: “you are certainly as good as you are beautiful! but you have not yet told me how to get back to kansas.” “your silver shoes will carry you over the desert,” replied glinda. “if you had known their power you could have gone back to your aunt em the very first day you came to this country.” “but then i should not have had my wonderful brains!” cried the scarecrow. “i might have passed my whole life in the farmer’s cornfield.” “and i should not have had my lovely heart,” said the tin woodman. “i might have stood and rusted in the forest till the end of the world.” “and i should have lived a coward forever,” declared the lion, “and no beast in all the forest would have had a good word to say to me.” “this is all true,” said dorothy, “and i am glad i was of use to these good friends. but now that each of them has had what he most desired, and each is happy in having a kingdom to rule besides, i think i should like to go back to kansas.” “the silver shoes,” said the good witch, “have wonderful powers. and one of the most curious things about them is that they can carry you to any place in the world in three steps, and each step will be made in the wink of an eye. all you have to do is to knock the heels together three times and command the shoes to carry you wherever you wish to go.” “if that is so,” said the child joyfully, “i will ask them to carry me back to kansas at once.” she threw her arms around the lion’s neck and kissed him, patting his big head tenderly. then she kissed the tin woodman, who was weeping in a way most dangerous to his joints. but she hugged the soft, stuffed body of the scarecrow in her arms instead of kissing his painted face, and found she was crying herself at this sorrowful parting from her loving comrades. glinda the good stepped down from her ruby throne to give the little girl a good-bye kiss, and dorothy thanked her for all the kindness she had shown to her friends and herself. dorothy now took toto up solemnly in her arms, and having said one last good-bye she clapped the heels of her shoes together three times, saying: “take me home to aunt em!” instantly she was whirling through the air, so swiftly that all she could see or feel was the wind whistling past her ears. the silver shoes took but three steps, and then she stopped so suddenly that she rolled over upon the grass several times before she knew where she was. at length, however, she sat up and looked about her. “good gracious!” she cried. for she was sitting on the broad kansas prairie, and just before her was the new farmhouse uncle henry built after the cyclone had carried away the old one. uncle henry was milking the cows in the barnyard, and toto had jumped out of her arms and was running toward the barn, barking furiously. dorothy stood up and found she was in her stocking-feet. for the silver shoes had fallen off in her flight through the air, and were lost forever in the desert. chapter xxiv home again aunt em had just come out of the house to water the cabbages when she looked up and saw dorothy running toward her. “my darling child!” she cried, folding the little girl in her arms and covering her face with kisses. “where in the world did you come from?” “from the land of oz,” said dorothy gravely. “and here is toto, too. and oh, aunt em! i’m so glad to be at home again!” *** end of the project gutenberg ebook the wonderful wizard of oz *** updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed. creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright law means that no one owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without permission and without paying copyright royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™ concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution. start: full license the full project gutenberg license please read this before you distribute or use this work to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license. section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™ electronic works 1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 1.b. “project gutenberg” is a registered trademark. it may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™ electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below. 1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the foundation” or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the united states and you are located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when you share it without charge with others. 1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the united states. 1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg: 1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear prominently whenever any copy of a project gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed: this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook. 1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “project gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™ license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™. 1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project gutenberg™ license. 1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a project gutenberg™ work in a format other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1. 1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works provided that: • you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation.” • you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™ license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™ works. • you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of receipt of the work. • you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of project gutenberg™ works. 1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 1.f. 1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment. 1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a project gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such damage. 1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem. 1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose. 1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions. 1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any defect you cause. section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™ project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life. volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org. section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws. the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the irs. the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate. while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate. international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff. please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses. donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate. section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone. for forty years, he produced and distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only a loose network of volunteer support. ====book2====== the project gutenberg ebook of romeo and juliet this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook. title: romeo and juliet author: william shakespeare release date: november 1, 1998 [ebook #1513] most recently updated: september 18, 2025 language: english credits: the pg shakespeare team, a team of about twenty project gutenberg volunteers *** start of the project gutenberg ebook romeo and juliet *** the tragedy of romeo and juliet by william shakespeare contents the prologue. act i scene i. a public place. scene ii. a street. scene iii. room in capulet’s house. scene iv. a street. scene v. a hall in capulet’s house. act ii chorus. scene i. an open place adjoining capulet’s garden. scene ii. capulet’s garden. scene iii. friar lawrence’s cell. scene iv. a street. scene v. capulet’s garden. scene vi. friar lawrence’s cell. act iii scene i. a public place. scene ii. a room in capulet’s house. scene iii. friar lawrence’s cell. scene iv. a room in capulet’s house. scene v. an open gallery to juliet’s chamber, overlooking the garden. act iv scene i. friar lawrence’s cell. scene ii. hall in capulet’s house. scene iii. juliet’s chamber. scene iv. hall in capulet’s house. scene v. juliet’s chamber; juliet on the bed. act v scene i. mantua. a street. scene ii. friar lawrence’s cell. scene iii. a churchyard; in it a monument belonging to the capulets. dramatis personæ escalus, prince of verona. mercutio, kinsman to the prince, and friend to romeo. paris, a young nobleman, kinsman to the prince. page to paris. montague, head of a veronese family at feud with the capulets. lady montague, wife to montague. romeo, son to montague. benvolio, nephew to montague, and friend to romeo. abram, servant to montague. balthasar, servant to romeo. capulet, head of a veronese family at feud with the montagues. lady capulet, wife to capulet. juliet, daughter to capulet. tybalt, nephew to lady capulet. capulet’s cousin, an old man. nurse to juliet. peter, servant to juliet’s nurse. sampson, servant to capulet. gregory, servant to capulet. servants. friar lawrence, a franciscan. friar john, of the same order. an apothecary. chorus. three musicians. an officer. citizens of verona; several men and women, relations to both houses; maskers, guards, watchmen and attendants. scene. during the greater part of the play in verona; once, in the fifth act, at mantua. the prologue enter chorus. chorus. two households, both alike in dignity, in fair verona, where we lay our scene, from ancient grudge break to new mutiny, where civil blood makes civil hands unclean. from forth the fatal loins of these two foes a pair of star-cross’d lovers take their life; whose misadventur’d piteous overthrows doth with their death bury their parents’ strife. the fearful passage of their death-mark’d love, and the continuance of their parents’ rage, which, but their children’s end, nought could remove, is now the two hours’ traffic of our stage; the which, if you with patient ears attend, what here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend. [_exit._] act i scene i. a public place. enter sampson and gregory armed with swords and bucklers. sampson. gregory, on my word, we’ll not carry coals. gregory. no, for then we should be colliers. sampson. i mean, if we be in choler, we’ll draw. gregory. ay, while you live, draw your neck out o’ the collar. sampson. i strike quickly, being moved. gregory. but thou art not quickly moved to strike. sampson. a dog of the house of montague moves me. gregory. to move is to stir; and to be valiant is to stand: therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn’st away. sampson. a dog of that house shall move me to stand. i will take the wall of any man or maid of montague’s. gregory. that shows thee a weak slave, for the weakest goes to the wall. sampson. true, and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are ever thrust to the wall: therefore i will push montague’s men from the wall, and thrust his maids to the wall. gregory. the quarrel is between our masters and us their men. sampson. ’tis all one, i will show myself a tyrant: when i have fought with the men i will be civil with the maids, i will cut off their heads. gregory. the heads of the maids? sampson. ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads; take it in what sense thou wilt. gregory. they must take it in sense that feel it. sampson. me they shall feel while i am able to stand: and ’tis known i am a pretty piece of flesh. gregory. ’tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou hadst been poor john. draw thy tool; here comes of the house of montagues. enter abram and balthasar. sampson. my naked weapon is out: quarrel, i will back thee. gregory. how? turn thy back and run? sampson. fear me not. gregory. no, marry; i fear thee! sampson. let us take the law of our sides; let them begin. gregory. i will frown as i pass by, and let them take it as they list. sampson. nay, as they dare. i will bite my thumb at them, which is disgrace to them if they bear it. abram. do you bite your thumb at us, sir? sampson. i do bite my thumb, sir. abram. do you bite your thumb at us, sir? sampson. is the law of our side if i say ay? gregory. no. sampson. no sir, i do not bite my thumb at you, sir; but i bite my thumb, sir. gregory. do you quarrel, sir? abram. quarrel, sir? no, sir. sampson. but if you do, sir, i am for you. i serve as good a man as you. abram. no better. sampson. well, sir. enter benvolio. gregory. say better; here comes one of my master’s kinsmen. sampson. yes, better, sir. abram. you lie. sampson. draw, if you be men. gregory, remember thy washing blow. [_they fight._] benvolio. part, fools! put up your swords, you know not what you do. [_beats down their swords._] enter tybalt. tybalt. what, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds? turn thee benvolio, look upon thy death. benvolio. i do but keep the peace, put up thy sword, or manage it to part these men with me. tybalt. what, drawn, and talk of peace? i hate the word as i hate hell, all montagues, and thee: have at thee, coward. [_they fight._] enter three or four citizens with clubs. first citizen. clubs, bills and partisans! strike! beat them down! down with the capulets! down with the montagues! enter capulet in his gown, and lady capulet. capulet. what noise is this? give me my long sword, ho! lady capulet. a crutch, a crutch! why call you for a sword? capulet. my sword, i say! old montague is come, and flourishes his blade in spite of me. enter montague and his lady montague. montague. thou villain capulet! hold me not, let me go. lady montague. thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe. enter prince escalus, with attendants. prince. rebellious subjects, enemies to peace, profaners of this neighbour-stained steel,— will they not hear? what, ho! you men, you beasts, that quench the fire of your pernicious rage with purple fountains issuing from your veins, on pain of torture, from those bloody hands throw your mistemper’d weapons to the ground and hear the sentence of your moved prince. three civil brawls, bred of an airy word, by thee, old capulet, and montague, have thrice disturb’d the quiet of our streets, and made verona’s ancient citizens cast by their grave beseeming ornaments, to wield old partisans, in hands as old, canker’d with peace, to part your canker’d hate. if ever you disturb our streets again, your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace. for this time all the rest depart away: you, capulet, shall go along with me, and montague, come you this afternoon, to know our farther pleasure in this case, to old free-town, our common judgement-place. once more, on pain of death, all men depart. [_exeunt prince and attendants; capulet, lady capulet, tybalt, citizens and servants._] montague. who set this ancient quarrel new abroach? speak, nephew, were you by when it began? benvolio. here were the servants of your adversary and yours, close fighting ere i did approach. i drew to part them, in the instant came the fiery tybalt, with his sword prepar’d, which, as he breath’d defiance to my ears, he swung about his head, and cut the winds, who nothing hurt withal, hiss’d him in scorn. while we were interchanging thrusts and blows came more and more, and fought on part and part, till the prince came, who parted either part. lady montague. o where is romeo, saw you him today? right glad i am he was not at this fray. benvolio. madam, an hour before the worshipp’d sun peer’d forth the golden window of the east, a troubled mind drave me to walk abroad, where underneath the grove of sycamore that westward rooteth from this city side, so early walking did i see your son. towards him i made, but he was ware of me, and stole into the covert of the wood. i, measuring his affections by my own, which then most sought where most might not be found, being one too many by my weary self, pursu’d my humour, not pursuing his, and gladly shunn’d who gladly fled from me. montague. many a morning hath he there been seen, with tears augmenting the fresh morning’s dew, adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs; but all so soon as the all-cheering sun should in the farthest east begin to draw the shady curtains from aurora’s bed, away from light steals home my heavy son, and private in his chamber pens himself, shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight out and makes himself an artificial night. black and portentous must this humour prove, unless good counsel may the cause remove. benvolio. my noble uncle, do you know the cause? montague. i neither know it nor can learn of him. benvolio. have you importun’d him by any means? montague. both by myself and many other friends; but he, his own affections’ counsellor, is to himself—i will not say how true— but to himself so secret and so close, so far from sounding and discovery, as is the bud bit with an envious worm ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air, or dedicate his beauty to the sun. could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow, we would as willingly give cure as know. enter romeo. benvolio. see, where he comes. so please you step aside; i’ll know his grievance or be much denied. montague. i would thou wert so happy by thy stay to hear true shrift. come, madam, let’s away, [_exeunt montague and lady montague._] benvolio. good morrow, cousin. romeo. is the day so young? benvolio. but new struck nine. romeo. ay me, sad hours seem long. was that my father that went hence so fast? benvolio. it was. what sadness lengthens romeo’s hours? romeo. not having that which, having, makes them short. benvolio. in love? romeo. out. benvolio. of love? romeo. out of her favour where i am in love. benvolio. alas that love so gentle in his view, should be so tyrannous and rough in proof. romeo. alas that love, whose view is muffled still, should, without eyes, see pathways to his will! where shall we dine? o me! what fray was here? yet tell me not, for i have heard it all. here’s much to do with hate, but more with love: why, then, o brawling love! o loving hate! o anything, of nothing first create! o heavy lightness! serious vanity! misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms! feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health! still-waking sleep, that is not what it is! this love feel i, that feel no love in this. dost thou not laugh? benvolio. no coz, i rather weep. romeo. good heart, at what? benvolio. at thy good heart’s oppression. romeo. why such is love’s transgression. griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast, which thou wilt propagate to have it prest with more of thine. this love that thou hast shown doth add more grief to too much of mine own. love is a smoke made with the fume of sighs; being purg’d, a fire sparkling in lovers’ eyes; being vex’d, a sea nourish’d with lovers’ tears: what is it else? a madness most discreet, a choking gall, and a preserving sweet. farewell, my coz. [_going._] benvolio. soft! i will go along: and if you leave me so, you do me wrong. romeo. tut! i have lost myself; i am not here. this is not romeo, he’s some other where. benvolio. tell me in sadness who is that you love? romeo. what, shall i groan and tell thee? benvolio. groan! why, no; but sadly tell me who. romeo. bid a sick man in sadness make his will, a word ill urg’d to one that is so ill. in sadness, cousin, i do love a woman. benvolio. i aim’d so near when i suppos’d you lov’d. romeo. a right good markman, and she’s fair i love. benvolio. a right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit. romeo. well, in that hit you miss: she’ll not be hit with cupid’s arrow, she hath dian’s wit; and in strong proof of chastity well arm’d, from love’s weak childish bow she lives uncharm’d. she will not stay the siege of loving terms nor bide th’encounter of assailing eyes, nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold: o she’s rich in beauty, only poor that when she dies, with beauty dies her store. benvolio. then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste? romeo. she hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste; for beauty starv’d with her severity, cuts beauty off from all posterity. she is too fair, too wise; wisely too fair, to merit bliss by making me despair. she hath forsworn to love, and in that vow do i live dead, that live to tell it now. benvolio. be rul’d by me, forget to think of her. romeo. o teach me how i should forget to think. benvolio. by giving liberty unto thine eyes; examine other beauties. romeo. ’tis the way to call hers, exquisite, in question more. these happy masks that kiss fair ladies’ brows, being black, puts us in mind they hide the fair; he that is strucken blind cannot forget the precious treasure of his eyesight lost. show me a mistress that is passing fair, what doth her beauty serve but as a note where i may read who pass’d that passing fair? farewell, thou canst not teach me to forget. benvolio. i’ll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt. [_exeunt._] scene ii. a street. enter capulet, paris and servant. capulet. but montague is bound as well as i, in penalty alike; and ’tis not hard, i think, for men so old as we to keep the peace. paris. of honourable reckoning are you both, and pity ’tis you liv’d at odds so long. but now my lord, what say you to my suit? capulet. but saying o’er what i have said before. my child is yet a stranger in the world, she hath not seen the change of fourteen years; let two more summers wither in their pride ere we may think her ripe to be a bride. paris. younger than she are happy mothers made. capulet. and too soon marr’d are those so early made. the earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she, she is the hopeful lady of my earth: but woo her, gentle paris, get her heart, my will to her consent is but a part; and she agree, within her scope of choice lies my consent and fair according voice. this night i hold an old accustom’d feast, whereto i have invited many a guest, such as i love, and you among the store, one more, most welcome, makes my number more. at my poor house look to behold this night earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light: such comfort as do lusty young men feel when well apparell’d april on the heel of limping winter treads, even such delight among fresh female buds shall you this night inherit at my house. hear all, all see, and like her most whose merit most shall be: which, on more view of many, mine, being one, may stand in number, though in reckoning none. come, go with me. go, sirrah, trudge about through fair verona; find those persons out whose names are written there, [_gives a paper_] and to them say, my house and welcome on their pleasure stay. [_exeunt capulet and paris._] servant. find them out whose names are written here! it is written that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor with his last, the fisher with his pencil, and the painter with his nets; but i am sent to find those persons whose names are here writ, and can never find what names the writing person hath here writ. i must to the learned. in good time! enter benvolio and romeo. benvolio. tut, man, one fire burns out another’s burning, one pain is lessen’d by another’s anguish; turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning; one desperate grief cures with another’s languish: take thou some new infection to thy eye, and the rank poison of the old will die. romeo. your plantain leaf is excellent for that. benvolio. for what, i pray thee? romeo. for your broken shin. benvolio. why, romeo, art thou mad? romeo. not mad, but bound more than a madman is: shut up in prison, kept without my food, whipp’d and tormented and—god-den, good fellow. servant. god gi’ go-den. i pray, sir, can you read? romeo. ay, mine own fortune in my misery. servant. perhaps you have learned it without book. but i pray, can you read anything you see? romeo. ay, if i know the letters and the language. servant. ye say honestly, rest you merry! romeo. stay, fellow; i can read. [_he reads the letter._] _signior martino and his wife and daughters; county anselmo and his beauteous sisters; the lady widow of utruvio; signior placentio and his lovely nieces; mercutio and his brother valentine; mine uncle capulet, his wife, and daughters; my fair niece rosaline and livia; signior valentio and his cousin tybalt; lucio and the lively helena. _ a fair assembly. [_gives back the paper_] whither should they come? servant. up. romeo. whither to supper? servant. to our house. romeo. whose house? servant. my master’s. romeo. indeed i should have ask’d you that before. servant. now i’ll tell you without asking. my master is the great rich capulet, and if you be not of the house of montagues, i pray come and crush a cup of wine. rest you merry. [_exit._] benvolio. at this same ancient feast of capulet’s sups the fair rosaline whom thou so lov’st; with all the admired beauties of verona. go thither and with unattainted eye, compare her face with some that i shall show, and i will make thee think thy swan a crow. romeo. when the devout religion of mine eye maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fire; and these who, often drown’d, could never die, transparent heretics, be burnt for liars. one fairer than my love? the all-seeing sun ne’er saw her match since first the world begun. benvolio. tut, you saw her fair, none else being by, herself pois’d with herself in either eye: but in that crystal scales let there be weigh’d your lady’s love against some other maid that i will show you shining at this feast, and she shall scant show well that now shows best. romeo. i’ll go along, no such sight to be shown, but to rejoice in splendour of my own. [_exeunt._] scene iii. room in capulet’s house. enter lady capulet and nurse. lady capulet. nurse, where’s my daughter? call her forth to me. nurse. now, by my maidenhead, at twelve year old, i bade her come. what, lamb! what ladybird! god forbid! where’s this girl? what, juliet! enter juliet. juliet. how now, who calls? nurse. your mother. juliet. madam, i am here. what is your will? lady capulet. this is the matter. nurse, give leave awhile, we must talk in secret. nurse, come back again, i have remember’d me, thou’s hear our counsel. thou knowest my daughter’s of a pretty age. nurse. faith, i can tell her age unto an hour. lady capulet. she’s not fourteen. nurse. i’ll lay fourteen of my teeth, and yet, to my teen be it spoken, i have but four, she is not fourteen. how long is it now to lammas-tide? lady capulet. a fortnight and odd days. nurse. even or odd, of all days in the year, come lammas eve at night shall she be fourteen. susan and she,—god rest all christian souls!— were of an age. well, susan is with god; she was too good for me. but as i said, on lammas eve at night shall she be fourteen; that shall she, marry; i remember it well. ’tis since the earthquake now eleven years; and she was wean’d,—i never shall forget it—, of all the days of the year, upon that day: for i had then laid wormwood to my dug, sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall; my lord and you were then at mantua: nay, i do bear a brain. but as i said, when it did taste the wormwood on the nipple of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool, to see it tetchy, and fall out with the dug! shake, quoth the dovehouse: ’twas no need, i trow, to bid me trudge. and since that time it is eleven years; for then she could stand alone; nay, by th’rood she could have run and waddled all about; for even the day before she broke her brow, and then my husband,—god be with his soul! a was a merry man,—took up the child: ‘yea,’ quoth he, ‘dost thou fall upon thy face? thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit; wilt thou not, jule?’ and, by my holidame, the pretty wretch left crying, and said ‘ay’. to see now how a jest shall come about. i warrant, and i should live a thousand years, i never should forget it. ‘wilt thou not, jule?’ quoth he; and, pretty fool, it stinted, and said ‘ay.’ lady capulet. enough of this; i pray thee hold thy peace. nurse. yes, madam, yet i cannot choose but laugh, to think it should leave crying, and say ‘ay’; and yet i warrant it had upon it brow a bump as big as a young cockerel’s stone; a perilous knock, and it cried bitterly. ‘yea,’ quoth my husband, ‘fall’st upon thy face? thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age; wilt thou not, jule?’ it stinted, and said ‘ay’. juliet. and stint thou too, i pray thee, nurse, say i. nurse. peace, i have done. god mark thee to his grace thou wast the prettiest babe that e’er i nurs’d: and i might live to see thee married once, i have my wish. lady capulet. marry, that marry is the very theme i came to talk of. tell me, daughter juliet, how stands your disposition to be married? juliet. it is an honour that i dream not of. nurse. an honour! were not i thine only nurse, i would say thou hadst suck’d wisdom from thy teat. lady capulet. well, think of marriage now: younger than you, here in verona, ladies of esteem, are made already mothers. by my count i was your mother much upon these years that you are now a maid. thus, then, in brief; the valiant paris seeks you for his love. nurse. a man, young lady! lady, such a man as all the world—why he’s a man of wax. lady capulet. verona’s summer hath not such a flower. nurse. nay, he’s a flower, in faith a very flower. lady capulet. what say you, can you love the gentleman? this night you shall behold him at our feast; read o’er the volume of young paris’ face, and find delight writ there with beauty’s pen. examine every married lineament, and see how one another lends content; and what obscur’d in this fair volume lies, find written in the margent of his eyes. this precious book of love, this unbound lover, to beautify him, only lacks a cover: the fish lives in the sea; and ’tis much pride for fair without the fair within to hide. that book in many’s eyes doth share the glory, that in gold clasps locks in the golden story; so shall you share all that he doth possess, by having him, making yourself no less. nurse. no less, nay bigger. women grow by men. lady capulet. speak briefly, can you like of paris’ love? juliet. i’ll look to like, if looking liking move: but no more deep will i endart mine eye than your consent gives strength to make it fly. enter a servant. servant. madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you called, my young lady asked for, the nurse cursed in the pantry, and everything in extremity. i must hence to wait, i beseech you follow straight. lady capulet. we follow thee. [_exit servant._] juliet, the county stays. nurse. go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days. [_exeunt._] scene iv. a street. enter romeo, mercutio, benvolio, with five or six maskers; torch-bearers and others. romeo. what, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse? or shall we on without apology? benvolio. the date is out of such prolixity: we’ll have no cupid hoodwink’d with a scarf, bearing a tartar’s painted bow of lath, scaring the ladies like a crow-keeper; nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke after the prompter, for our entrance: but let them measure us by what they will, we’ll measure them a measure, and be gone. romeo. give me a torch, i am not for this ambling; being but heavy i will bear the light. mercutio. nay, gentle romeo, we must have you dance. romeo. not i, believe me, you have dancing shoes, with nimble soles, i have a soul of lead so stakes me to the ground i cannot move. mercutio. you are a lover, borrow cupid’s wings, and soar with them above a common bound. romeo. i am too sore enpierced with his shaft to soar with his light feathers, and so bound, i cannot bound a pitch above dull woe. under love’s heavy burden do i sink. mercutio. and, to sink in it, should you burden love; too great oppression for a tender thing. romeo. is love a tender thing? it is too rough, too rude, too boisterous; and it pricks like thorn. mercutio. if love be rough with you, be rough with love; prick love for pricking, and you beat love down. give me a case to put my visage in: [_putting on a mask._] a visor for a visor. what care i what curious eye doth quote deformities? here are the beetle-brows shall blush for me. benvolio. come, knock and enter; and no sooner in but every man betake him to his legs. romeo. a torch for me: let wantons, light of heart, tickle the senseless rushes with their heels; for i am proverb’d with a grandsire phrase, i’ll be a candle-holder and look on, the game was ne’er so fair, and i am done. mercutio. tut, dun’s the mouse, the constable’s own word: if thou art dun, we’ll draw thee from the mire or save your reverence love, wherein thou stickest up to the ears. come, we burn daylight, ho. romeo. nay, that’s not so. mercutio. i mean sir, in delay we waste our lights in vain, light lights by day. take our good meaning, for our judgment sits five times in that ere once in our five wits. romeo. and we mean well in going to this mask; but ’tis no wit to go. mercutio. why, may one ask? romeo. i dreamt a dream tonight. mercutio. and so did i. romeo. well what was yours? mercutio. that dreamers often lie. romeo. in bed asleep, while they do dream things true. mercutio. o, then, i see queen mab hath been with you. she is the fairies’ midwife, and she comes in shape no bigger than an agate-stone on the fore-finger of an alderman, drawn with a team of little atomies over men’s noses as they lie asleep: her waggon-spokes made of long spinners’ legs; the cover, of the wings of grasshoppers; her traces, of the smallest spider’s web; the collars, of the moonshine’s watery beams; her whip of cricket’s bone; the lash, of film; her waggoner, a small grey-coated gnat, not half so big as a round little worm prick’d from the lazy finger of a maid: her chariot is an empty hazelnut, made by the joiner squirrel or old grub, time out o’ mind the fairies’ coachmakers. and in this state she gallops night by night through lovers’ brains, and then they dream of love; o’er courtiers’ knees, that dream on curtsies straight; o’er lawyers’ fingers, who straight dream on fees; o’er ladies’ lips, who straight on kisses dream, which oft the angry mab with blisters plagues, because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are: sometime she gallops o’er a courtier’s nose, and then dreams he of smelling out a suit; and sometime comes she with a tithe-pig’s tail, tickling a parson’s nose as a lies asleep, then dreams he of another benefice: sometime she driveth o’er a soldier’s neck, and then dreams he of cutting foreign throats, of breaches, ambuscados, spanish blades, of healths five fathom deep; and then anon drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes; and, being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two, and sleeps again. this is that very mab that plats the manes of horses in the night; and bakes the elf-locks in foul sluttish hairs, which, once untangled, much misfortune bodes: this is the hag, when maids lie on their backs, that presses them, and learns them first to bear, making them women of good carriage: this is she,— romeo. peace, peace, mercutio, peace, thou talk’st of nothing. mercutio. true, i talk of dreams, which are the children of an idle brain, begot of nothing but vain fantasy, which is as thin of substance as the air, and more inconstant than the wind, who woos even now the frozen bosom of the north, and, being anger’d, puffs away from thence, turning his side to the dew-dropping south. benvolio. this wind you talk of blows us from ourselves: supper is done, and we shall come too late. romeo. i fear too early: for my mind misgives some consequence yet hanging in the stars, shall bitterly begin his fearful date with this night’s revels; and expire the term of a despised life, clos’d in my breast by some vile forfeit of untimely death. but he that hath the steerage of my course direct my suit. on, lusty gentlemen! benvolio. strike, drum. [_exeunt._] scene v. a hall in capulet’s house. musicians waiting. enter servants. first servant. where’s potpan, that he helps not to take away? he shift a trencher! he scrape a trencher! second servant. when good manners shall lie all in one or two men’s hands, and they unwash’d too, ’tis a foul thing. first servant. away with the join-stools, remove the court-cupboard, look to the plate. good thou, save me a piece of marchpane; and as thou loves me, let the porter let in susan grindstone and nell. antony and potpan! second servant. ay, boy, ready. first servant. you are looked for and called for, asked for and sought for, in the great chamber. second servant. we cannot be here and there too. cheerly, boys. be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all. [_exeunt._] enter capulet, &c. with the guests and gentlewomen to the maskers. capulet. welcome, gentlemen, ladies that have their toes unplagu’d with corns will have a bout with you. ah my mistresses, which of you all will now deny to dance? she that makes dainty, she i’ll swear hath corns. am i come near ye now? welcome, gentlemen! i have seen the day that i have worn a visor, and could tell a whispering tale in a fair lady’s ear, such as would please; ’tis gone, ’tis gone, ’tis gone, you are welcome, gentlemen! come, musicians, play. a hall, a hall, give room! and foot it, girls. [_music plays, and they dance._] more light, you knaves; and turn the tables up, and quench the fire, the room is grown too hot. ah sirrah, this unlook’d-for sport comes well. nay sit, nay sit, good cousin capulet, for you and i are past our dancing days; how long is’t now since last yourself and i were in a mask? capulet’s cousin. by’r lady, thirty years. capulet. what, man, ’tis not so much, ’tis not so much: ’tis since the nuptial of lucentio, come pentecost as quickly as it will, some five and twenty years; and then we mask’d. capulet’s cousin. ’tis more, ’tis more, his son is elder, sir; his son is thirty. capulet. will you tell me that? his son was but a ward two years ago. romeo. what lady is that, which doth enrich the hand of yonder knight? servant. i know not, sir. romeo. o, she doth teach the torches to burn bright! it seems she hangs upon the cheek of night as a rich jewel in an ethiop’s ear; beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear! so shows a snowy dove trooping with crows as yonder lady o’er her fellows shows. the measure done, i’ll watch her place of stand, and touching hers, make blessed my rude hand. did my heart love till now? forswear it, sight! for i ne’er saw true beauty till this night. tybalt. this by his voice, should be a montague. fetch me my rapier, boy. what, dares the slave come hither, cover’d with an antic face, to fleer and scorn at our solemnity? now by the stock and honour of my kin, to strike him dead i hold it not a sin. capulet. why how now, kinsman! wherefore storm you so? tybalt. uncle, this is a montague, our foe; a villain that is hither come in spite, to scorn at our solemnity this night. capulet. young romeo, is it? tybalt. ’tis he, that villain romeo. capulet. content thee, gentle coz, let him alone, a bears him like a portly gentleman; and, to say truth, verona brags of him to be a virtuous and well-govern’d youth. i would not for the wealth of all the town here in my house do him disparagement. therefore be patient, take no note of him, it is my will; the which if thou respect, show a fair presence and put off these frowns, an ill-beseeming semblance for a feast. tybalt. it fits when such a villain is a guest: i’ll not endure him. capulet. he shall be endur’d. what, goodman boy! i say he shall, go to; am i the master here, or you? go to. you’ll not endure him! god shall mend my soul, you’ll make a mutiny among my guests! you will set cock-a-hoop, you’ll be the man! tybalt. why, uncle, ’tis a shame. capulet. go to, go to! you are a saucy boy. is’t so, indeed? this trick may chance to scathe you, i know what. you must contrary me! marry, ’tis time. well said, my hearts!—you are a princox; go: be quiet, or—more light, more light!—for shame! i’ll make you quiet. what, cheerly, my hearts. tybalt. patience perforce with wilful choler meeting makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting. i will withdraw: but this intrusion shall, now seeming sweet, convert to bitter gall. [_exit._] romeo. [_to juliet._] if i profane with my unworthiest hand this holy shrine, the gentle sin is this, my lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand to smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss. juliet. good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much, which mannerly devotion shows in this; for saints have hands that pilgrims’ hands do touch, and palm to palm is holy palmers’ kiss. romeo. have not saints lips, and holy palmers too? juliet. ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer. romeo. o, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do: they pray, grant thou, lest faith turn to despair. juliet. saints do not move, though grant for prayers’ sake. romeo. then move not while my prayer’s effect i take. thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purg’d. [_kissing her._] juliet. then have my lips the sin that they have took. romeo. sin from my lips? o trespass sweetly urg’d! give me my sin again. juliet. you kiss by the book. nurse. madam, your mother craves a word with you. romeo. what is her mother? nurse. marry, bachelor, her mother is the lady of the house, and a good lady, and a wise and virtuous. i nurs’d her daughter that you talk’d withal. i tell you, he that can lay hold of her shall have the chinks. romeo. is she a capulet? o dear account! my life is my foe’s debt. benvolio. away, be gone; the sport is at the best. romeo. ay, so i fear; the more is my unrest. capulet. nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone, we have a trifling foolish banquet towards. is it e’en so? why then, i thank you all; i thank you, honest gentlemen; good night. more torches here! come on then, let’s to bed. ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late, i’ll to my rest. [_exeunt all but juliet and nurse._] juliet. come hither, nurse. what is yond gentleman? nurse. the son and heir of old tiberio. juliet. what’s he that now is going out of door? nurse. marry, that i think be young petruchio. juliet. what’s he that follows here, that would not dance? nurse. i know not. juliet. go ask his name. if he be married, my grave is like to be my wedding bed. nurse. his name is romeo, and a montague, the only son of your great enemy. juliet. my only love sprung from my only hate! too early seen unknown, and known too late! prodigious birth of love it is to me, that i must love a loathed enemy. nurse. what’s this? what’s this? juliet. a rhyme i learn’d even now of one i danc’d withal. [_one calls within, ‘juliet’._] nurse. anon, anon! come let’s away, the strangers all are gone. [_exeunt._] act ii enter chorus. chorus. now old desire doth in his deathbed lie, and young affection gapes to be his heir; that fair for which love groan’d for and would die, with tender juliet match’d, is now not fair. now romeo is belov’d, and loves again, alike bewitched by the charm of looks; but to his foe suppos’d he must complain, and she steal love’s sweet bait from fearful hooks: being held a foe, he may not have access to breathe such vows as lovers use to swear; and she as much in love, her means much less to meet her new beloved anywhere. but passion lends them power, time means, to meet, tempering extremities with extreme sweet. [_exit._] scene i. an open place adjoining capulet’s garden. enter romeo. romeo. can i go forward when my heart is here? turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out. [_he climbs the wall and leaps down within it._] enter benvolio and mercutio. benvolio. romeo! my cousin romeo! romeo! mercutio. he is wise, and on my life hath stol’n him home to bed. benvolio. he ran this way, and leap’d this orchard wall: call, good mercutio. mercutio. nay, i’ll conjure too. romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover! appear thou in the likeness of a sigh, speak but one rhyme, and i am satisfied; cry but ‘ah me!’ pronounce but love and dove; speak to my gossip venus one fair word, one nickname for her purblind son and heir, young abraham cupid, he that shot so trim when king cophetua lov’d the beggar-maid. he heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not; the ape is dead, and i must conjure him. i conjure thee by rosaline’s bright eyes, by her high forehead and her scarlet lip, by her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh, and the demesnes that there adjacent lie, that in thy likeness thou appear to us. benvolio. an if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him. mercutio. this cannot anger him. ’twould anger him to raise a spirit in his mistress’ circle, of some strange nature, letting it there stand till she had laid it, and conjur’d it down; that were some spite. my invocation is fair and honest, and, in his mistress’ name, i conjure only but to raise up him. benvolio. come, he hath hid himself among these trees to be consorted with the humorous night. blind is his love, and best befits the dark. mercutio. if love be blind, love cannot hit the mark. now will he sit under a medlar tree, and wish his mistress were that kind of fruit as maids call medlars when they laugh alone. o romeo, that she were, o that she were an open-arse and thou a poperin pear! romeo, good night. i’ll to my truckle-bed. this field-bed is too cold for me to sleep. come, shall we go? benvolio. go then; for ’tis in vain to seek him here that means not to be found. [_exeunt._] scene ii. capulet’s garden. enter romeo. romeo. he jests at scars that never felt a wound. juliet appears above at a window. but soft, what light through yonder window breaks? it is the east, and juliet is the sun! arise fair sun and kill the envious moon, who is already sick and pale with grief, that thou her maid art far more fair than she. be not her maid since she is envious; her vestal livery is but sick and green, and none but fools do wear it; cast it off. it is my lady, o it is my love! o, that she knew she were! she speaks, yet she says nothing. what of that? her eye discourses, i will answer it. i am too bold, ’tis not to me she speaks. two of the fairest stars in all the heaven, having some business, do entreat her eyes to twinkle in their spheres till they return. what if her eyes were there, they in her head? the brightness of her cheek would shame those stars, as daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven would through the airy region stream so bright that birds would sing and think it were not night. see how she leans her cheek upon her hand. o that i were a glove upon that hand, that i might touch that cheek. juliet. ay me. romeo. she speaks. o speak again bright angel, for thou art as glorious to this night, being o’er my head, as is a winged messenger of heaven unto the white-upturned wondering eyes of mortals that fall back to gaze on him when he bestrides the lazy-puffing clouds and sails upon the bosom of the air. juliet. o romeo, romeo, wherefore art thou romeo? deny thy father and refuse thy name. or if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love, and i’ll no longer be a capulet. romeo. [_aside._] shall i hear more, or shall i speak at this? juliet. ’tis but thy name that is my enemy; thou art thyself, though not a montague. what’s montague? it is nor hand nor foot, nor arm, nor face, nor any other part belonging to a man. o be some other name. what’s in a name? that which we call a rose by any other name would smell as sweet; so romeo would, were he not romeo call’d, retain that dear perfection which he owes without that title. romeo, doff thy name, and for thy name, which is no part of thee, take all myself. romeo. i take thee at thy word. call me but love, and i’ll be new baptis’d; henceforth i never will be romeo. juliet. what man art thou that, thus bescreen’d in night so stumblest on my counsel? romeo. by a name i know not how to tell thee who i am: my name, dear saint, is hateful to myself, because it is an enemy to thee. had i it written, i would tear the word. juliet. my ears have yet not drunk a hundred words of thy tongue’s utterance, yet i know the sound. art thou not romeo, and a montague? romeo. neither, fair maid, if either thee dislike. juliet. how cam’st thou hither, tell me, and wherefore? the orchard walls are high and hard to climb, and the place death, considering who thou art, if any of my kinsmen find thee here. romeo. with love’s light wings did i o’erperch these walls, for stony limits cannot hold love out, and what love can do, that dares love attempt: therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me. juliet. if they do see thee, they will murder thee. romeo. alack, there lies more peril in thine eye than twenty of their swords. look thou but sweet, and i am proof against their enmity. juliet. i would not for the world they saw thee here. romeo. i have night’s cloak to hide me from their eyes, and but thou love me, let them find me here. my life were better ended by their hate than death prorogued, wanting of thy love. juliet. by whose direction found’st thou out this place? romeo. by love, that first did prompt me to enquire; he lent me counsel, and i lent him eyes. i am no pilot; yet wert thou as far as that vast shore wash’d with the farthest sea, i should adventure for such merchandise. juliet. thou knowest the mask of night is on my face, else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek for that which thou hast heard me speak tonight. fain would i dwell on form, fain, fain deny what i have spoke; but farewell compliment. dost thou love me? i know thou wilt say ay, and i will take thy word. yet, if thou swear’st, thou mayst prove false. at lovers’ perjuries, they say jove laughs. o gentle romeo, if thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully. or if thou thinkest i am too quickly won, i’ll frown and be perverse, and say thee nay, so thou wilt woo. but else, not for the world. in truth, fair montague, i am too fond; and therefore thou mayst think my ’haviour light: but trust me, gentleman, i’ll prove more true than those that have more cunning to be strange. i should have been more strange, i must confess, but that thou overheard’st, ere i was ’ware, my true-love passion; therefore pardon me, and not impute this yielding to light love, which the dark night hath so discovered. romeo. lady, by yonder blessed moon i vow, that tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops,— juliet. o swear not by the moon, th’inconstant moon, that monthly changes in her circled orb, lest that thy love prove likewise variable. romeo. what shall i swear by? juliet. do not swear at all. or if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self, which is the god of my idolatry, and i’ll believe thee. romeo. if my heart’s dear love,— juliet. well, do not swear. although i joy in thee, i have no joy of this contract tonight; it is too rash, too unadvis’d, too sudden, too like the lightning, which doth cease to be ere one can say “it lightens.” sweet, good night. this bud of love, by summer’s ripening breath, may prove a beauteous flower when next we meet. good night, good night. as sweet repose and rest come to thy heart as that within my breast. romeo. o wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied? juliet. what satisfaction canst thou have tonight? romeo. th’exchange of thy love’s faithful vow for mine. juliet. i gave thee mine before thou didst request it; and yet i would it were to give again. romeo. would’st thou withdraw it? for what purpose, love? juliet. but to be frank and give it thee again. and yet i wish but for the thing i have; my bounty is as boundless as the sea, my love as deep; the more i give to thee, the more i have, for both are infinite. i hear some noise within. dear love, adieu. [_nurse calls within._] anon, good nurse!—sweet montague be true. stay but a little, i will come again. [_exit._] romeo. o blessed, blessed night. i am afeard, being in night, all this is but a dream, too flattering sweet to be substantial. enter juliet above. juliet. three words, dear romeo, and good night indeed. if that thy bent of love be honourable, thy purpose marriage, send me word tomorrow, by one that i’ll procure to come to thee, where and what time thou wilt perform the rite, and all my fortunes at thy foot i’ll lay and follow thee my lord throughout the world. nurse. [_within._] madam. juliet. i come, anon.— but if thou meanest not well, i do beseech thee,— nurse. [_within._] madam. juliet. by and by i come— to cease thy strife and leave me to my grief. tomorrow will i send. romeo. so thrive my soul,— juliet. a thousand times good night. [_exit._] romeo. a thousand times the worse, to want thy light. love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books, but love from love, towards school with heavy looks. [_retiring slowly._] re-enter juliet, above. juliet. hist! romeo, hist! o for a falconer’s voice to lure this tassel-gentle back again. bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud, else would i tear the cave where echo lies, and make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine with repetition of my romeo’s name. romeo. it is my soul that calls upon my name. how silver-sweet sound lovers’ tongues by night, like softest music to attending ears. juliet. romeo. romeo. my dear? juliet. what o’clock tomorrow shall i send to thee? romeo. by the hour of nine. juliet. i will not fail. ’tis twenty years till then. i have forgot why i did call thee back. romeo. let me stand here till thou remember it. juliet. i shall forget, to have thee still stand there, remembering how i love thy company. romeo. and i’ll still stay, to have thee still forget, forgetting any other home but this. juliet. ’tis almost morning; i would have thee gone, and yet no farther than a wanton’s bird, that lets it hop a little from her hand, like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves, and with a silk thread plucks it back again, so loving-jealous of his liberty. romeo. i would i were thy bird. juliet. sweet, so would i: yet i should kill thee with much cherishing. good night, good night. parting is such sweet sorrow that i shall say good night till it be morrow. [_exit._] romeo. sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast. would i were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest. hence will i to my ghostly sire’s cell, his help to crave and my dear hap to tell. [_exit._] scene iii. friar lawrence’s cell. enter friar lawrence with a basket. friar lawrence. the grey-ey’d morn smiles on the frowning night, chequering the eastern clouds with streaks of light; and fleckled darkness like a drunkard reels from forth day’s pathway, made by titan’s fiery wheels now, ere the sun advance his burning eye, the day to cheer, and night’s dank dew to dry, i must upfill this osier cage of ours with baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers. the earth that’s nature’s mother, is her tomb; what is her burying grave, that is her womb: and from her womb children of divers kind we sucking on her natural bosom find. many for many virtues excellent, none but for some, and yet all different. o, mickle is the powerful grace that lies in plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities. for naught so vile that on the earth doth live but to the earth some special good doth give; nor aught so good but, strain’d from that fair use, revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse. virtue itself turns vice being misapplied, and vice sometime’s by action dignified. enter romeo. within the infant rind of this weak flower poison hath residence, and medicine power: for this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part; being tasted, slays all senses with the heart. two such opposed kings encamp them still in man as well as herbs,—grace and rude will; and where the worser is predominant, full soon the canker death eats up that plant. romeo. good morrow, father. friar lawrence. benedicite! what early tongue so sweet saluteth me? young son, it argues a distemper’d head so soon to bid good morrow to thy bed. care keeps his watch in every old man’s eye, and where care lodges sleep will never lie; but where unbruised youth with unstuff’d brain doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign. therefore thy earliness doth me assure thou art uprous’d with some distemperature; or if not so, then here i hit it right, our romeo hath not been in bed tonight. romeo. that last is true; the sweeter rest was mine. friar lawrence. god pardon sin. wast thou with rosaline? romeo. with rosaline, my ghostly father? no. i have forgot that name, and that name’s woe. friar lawrence. that’s my good son. but where hast thou been then? romeo. i’ll tell thee ere thou ask it me again. i have been feasting with mine enemy, where on a sudden one hath wounded me that’s by me wounded. both our remedies within thy help and holy physic lies. i bear no hatred, blessed man; for lo, my intercession likewise steads my foe. friar lawrence. be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift; riddling confession finds but riddling shrift. romeo. then plainly know my heart’s dear love is set on the fair daughter of rich capulet. as mine on hers, so hers is set on mine; and all combin’d, save what thou must combine by holy marriage. when, and where, and how we met, we woo’d, and made exchange of vow, i’ll tell thee as we pass; but this i pray, that thou consent to marry us today. friar lawrence. holy saint francis! what a change is here! is rosaline, that thou didst love so dear, so soon forsaken? young men’s love then lies not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes. jesu maria, what a deal of brine hath wash’d thy sallow cheeks for rosaline! how much salt water thrown away in waste, to season love, that of it doth not taste. the sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears, thy old groans yet ring in mine ancient ears. lo here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit of an old tear that is not wash’d off yet. if ere thou wast thyself, and these woes thine, thou and these woes were all for rosaline, and art thou chang’d? pronounce this sentence then, women may fall, when there’s no strength in men. romeo. thou chidd’st me oft for loving rosaline. friar lawrence. for doting, not for loving, pupil mine. romeo. and bad’st me bury love. friar lawrence. not in a grave to lay one in, another out to have. romeo. i pray thee chide me not, her i love now doth grace for grace and love for love allow. the other did not so. friar lawrence. o, she knew well thy love did read by rote, that could not spell. but come young waverer, come go with me, in one respect i’ll thy assistant be; for this alliance may so happy prove, to turn your households’ rancour to pure love. romeo. o let us hence; i stand on sudden haste. friar lawrence. wisely and slow; they stumble that run fast. [_exeunt._] scene iv. a street. enter benvolio and mercutio. mercutio. where the devil should this romeo be? came he not home tonight? benvolio. not to his father’s; i spoke with his man. mercutio. why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that rosaline, torments him so that he will sure run mad. benvolio. tybalt, the kinsman to old capulet, hath sent a letter to his father’s house. mercutio. a challenge, on my life. benvolio. romeo will answer it. mercutio. any man that can write may answer a letter. benvolio. nay, he will answer the letter’s master, how he dares, being dared. mercutio. alas poor romeo, he is already dead, stabbed with a white wench’s black eye; run through the ear with a love song, the very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy’s butt-shaft. and is he a man to encounter tybalt? benvolio. why, what is tybalt? mercutio. more than prince of cats. o, he’s the courageous captain of compliments. he fights as you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance, and proportion. he rests his minim rest, one, two, and the third in your bosom: the very butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist; a gentleman of the very first house, of the first and second cause. ah, the immortal passado, the punto reverso, the hay. benvolio. the what? mercutio. the pox of such antic lisping, affecting phantasies; these new tuners of accent. by jesu, a very good blade, a very tall man, a very good whore. why, is not this a lamentable thing, grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these pardon-me’s, who stand so much on the new form that they cannot sit at ease on the old bench? o their bones, their bones! enter romeo. benvolio. here comes romeo, here comes romeo! mercutio. without his roe, like a dried herring. o flesh, flesh, how art thou fishified! now is he for the numbers that petrarch flowed in. laura, to his lady, was but a kitchen wench,—marry, she had a better love to berhyme her: dido a dowdy; cleopatra a gypsy; helen and hero hildings and harlots; thisbe a grey eye or so, but not to the purpose. signior romeo, bonjour! there’s a french salutation to your french slop. you gave us the counterfeit fairly last night. romeo. good morrow to you both. what counterfeit did i give you? mercutio. the slip sir, the slip; can you not conceive? romeo. pardon, good mercutio, my business was great, and in such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy. mercutio. that’s as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a man to bow in the hams. romeo. meaning, to curtsy. mercutio. thou hast most kindly hit it. romeo. a most courteous exposition. mercutio. nay, i am the very pink of courtesy. romeo. pink for flower. mercutio. right. romeo. why, then is my pump well flowered. mercutio. sure wit, follow me this jest now, till thou hast worn out thy pump, that when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may remain after the wearing, solely singular. romeo. o single-soled jest, solely singular for the singleness! mercutio. come between us, good benvolio; my wits faint. romeo. swits and spurs, swits and spurs; or i’ll cry a match. mercutio. nay, if thy wits run the wild-goose chase, i am done. for thou hast more of the wild-goose in one of thy wits, than i am sure, i have in my whole five. was i with you there for the goose? romeo. thou wast never with me for anything, when thou wast not there for the goose. mercutio. i will bite thee by the ear for that jest. romeo. nay, good goose, bite not. mercutio. thy wit is a very bitter sweeting, it is a most sharp sauce. romeo. and is it not then well served in to a sweet goose? mercutio. o here’s a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch narrow to an ell broad. romeo. i stretch it out for that word broad, which added to the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose. mercutio. why, is not this better now than groaning for love? now art thou sociable, now art thou romeo; now art thou what thou art, by art as well as by nature. for this drivelling love is like a great natural, that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole. benvolio. stop there, stop there. mercutio. thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair. benvolio. thou wouldst else have made thy tale large. mercutio. o, thou art deceived; i would have made it short, for i was come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant indeed to occupy the argument no longer. enter nurse and peter. romeo. here’s goodly gear! a sail, a sail! mercutio. two, two; a shirt and a smock. nurse. peter! peter. anon. nurse. my fan, peter. mercutio. good peter, to hide her face; for her fan’s the fairer face. nurse. god ye good morrow, gentlemen. mercutio. god ye good-den, fair gentlewoman. nurse. is it good-den? mercutio. ’tis no less, i tell ye; for the bawdy hand of the dial is now upon the prick of noon. nurse. out upon you! what a man are you? romeo. one, gentlewoman, that god hath made for himself to mar. nurse. by my troth, it is well said; for himself to mar, quoth a? gentlemen, can any of you tell me where i may find the young romeo? romeo. i can tell you: but young romeo will be older when you have found him than he was when you sought him. i am the youngest of that name, for fault of a worse. nurse. you say well. mercutio. yea, is the worst well? very well took, i’faith; wisely, wisely. nurse. if you be he, sir, i desire some confidence with you. benvolio. she will endite him to some supper. mercutio. a bawd, a bawd, a bawd! so ho! romeo. what hast thou found? mercutio. no hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent. [_sings._] an old hare hoar, and an old hare hoar, is very good meat in lent; but a hare that is hoar is too much for a score when it hoars ere it be spent. romeo, will you come to your father’s? we’ll to dinner thither. romeo. i will follow you. mercutio. farewell, ancient lady; farewell, lady, lady, lady. [_exeunt mercutio and benvolio._] nurse. i pray you, sir, what saucy merchant was this that was so full of his ropery? romeo. a gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk, and will speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month. nurse. and a speak anything against me, i’ll take him down, and a were lustier than he is, and twenty such jacks. and if i cannot, i’ll find those that shall. scurvy knave! i am none of his flirt-gills; i am none of his skains-mates.—and thou must stand by too and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure! peter. i saw no man use you at his pleasure; if i had, my weapon should quickly have been out. i warrant you, i dare draw as soon as another man, if i see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law on my side. nurse. now, afore god, i am so vexed that every part about me quivers. scurvy knave. pray you, sir, a word: and as i told you, my young lady bid me enquire you out; what she bade me say, i will keep to myself. but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her in a fool’s paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of behaviour, as they say; for the gentlewoman is young. and therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were an ill thing to be offered to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing. romeo. nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. i protest unto thee,— nurse. good heart, and i’faith i will tell her as much. lord, lord, she will be a joyful woman. romeo. what wilt thou tell her, nurse? thou dost not mark me. nurse. i will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as i take it, is a gentlemanlike offer. romeo. bid her devise some means to come to shrift this afternoon, and there she shall at friar lawrence’ cell be shriv’d and married. here is for thy pains. nurse. no truly, sir; not a penny. romeo. go to; i say you shall. nurse. this afternoon, sir? well, she shall be there. romeo. and stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall. within this hour my man shall be with thee, and bring thee cords made like a tackled stair, which to the high topgallant of my joy must be my convoy in the secret night. farewell, be trusty, and i’ll quit thy pains; farewell; commend me to thy mistress. nurse. now god in heaven bless thee. hark you, sir. romeo. what say’st thou, my dear nurse? nurse. is your man secret? did you ne’er hear say, two may keep counsel, putting one away? romeo. i warrant thee my man’s as true as steel. nurse. well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. lord, lord! when ’twas a little prating thing,—o, there is a nobleman in town, one paris, that would fain lay knife aboard; but she, good soul, had as lief see a toad, a very toad, as see him. i anger her sometimes, and tell her that paris is the properer man, but i’ll warrant you, when i say so, she looks as pale as any clout in the versal world. doth not rosemary and romeo begin both with a letter? romeo. ay, nurse; what of that? both with an r. nurse. ah, mocker! that’s the dog’s name. r is for the—no, i know it begins with some other letter, and she hath the prettiest sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good to hear it. romeo. commend me to thy lady. nurse. ay, a thousand times. peter! [_exit romeo._] peter. anon. nurse. before and apace. [_exeunt._] scene v. capulet’s garden. enter juliet. juliet. the clock struck nine when i did send the nurse, in half an hour she promised to return. perchance she cannot meet him. that’s not so. o, she is lame. love’s heralds should be thoughts, which ten times faster glides than the sun’s beams, driving back shadows over lowering hills: therefore do nimble-pinion’d doves draw love, and therefore hath the wind-swift cupid wings. now is the sun upon the highmost hill of this day’s journey, and from nine till twelve is three long hours, yet she is not come. had she affections and warm youthful blood, she’d be as swift in motion as a ball; my words would bandy her to my sweet love, and his to me. but old folks, many feign as they were dead; unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead. enter nurse and peter. o god, she comes. o honey nurse, what news? hast thou met with him? send thy man away. nurse. peter, stay at the gate. [_exit peter._] juliet. now, good sweet nurse,—o lord, why look’st thou sad? though news be sad, yet tell them merrily; if good, thou sham’st the music of sweet news by playing it to me with so sour a face. nurse. i am aweary, give me leave awhile; fie, how my bones ache! what a jaunt have i had! juliet. i would thou hadst my bones, and i thy news: nay come, i pray thee speak; good, good nurse, speak. nurse. jesu, what haste? can you not stay a while? do you not see that i am out of breath? juliet. how art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath to say to me that thou art out of breath? the excuse that thou dost make in this delay is longer than the tale thou dost excuse. is thy news good or bad? answer to that; say either, and i’ll stay the circumstance. let me be satisfied, is’t good or bad? nurse. well, you have made a simple choice; you know not how to choose a man. romeo? no, not he. though his face be better than any man’s, yet his leg excels all men’s, and for a hand and a foot, and a body, though they be not to be talked on, yet they are past compare. he is not the flower of courtesy, but i’ll warrant him as gentle as a lamb. go thy ways, wench, serve god. what, have you dined at home? juliet. no, no. but all this did i know before. what says he of our marriage? what of that? nurse. lord, how my head aches! what a head have i! it beats as it would fall in twenty pieces. my back o’ t’other side,—o my back, my back! beshrew your heart for sending me about to catch my death with jauncing up and down. juliet. i’faith, i am sorry that thou art not well. sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love? nurse. your love says like an honest gentleman, and a courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and i warrant a virtuous,—where is your mother? juliet. where is my mother? why, she is within. where should she be? how oddly thou repliest. ‘your love says, like an honest gentleman, ‘where is your mother?’ nurse. o god’s lady dear, are you so hot? marry, come up, i trow. is this the poultice for my aching bones? henceforward do your messages yourself. juliet. here’s such a coil. come, what says romeo? nurse. have you got leave to go to shrift today? juliet. i have. nurse. then hie you hence to friar lawrence’ cell; there stays a husband to make you a wife. now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks, they’ll be in scarlet straight at any news. hie you to church. i must another way, to fetch a ladder by the which your love must climb a bird’s nest soon when it is dark. i am the drudge, and toil in your delight; but you shall bear the burden soon at night. go. i’ll to dinner; hie you to the cell. juliet. hie to high fortune! honest nurse, farewell. [_exeunt._] scene vi. friar lawrence’s cell. enter friar lawrence and romeo. friar lawrence. so smile the heavens upon this holy act that after-hours with sorrow chide us not. romeo. amen, amen, but come what sorrow can, it cannot countervail the exchange of joy that one short minute gives me in her sight. do thou but close our hands with holy words, then love-devouring death do what he dare, it is enough i may but call her mine. friar lawrence. these violent delights have violent ends, and in their triumph die; like fire and powder, which as they kiss consume. the sweetest honey is loathsome in his own deliciousness, and in the taste confounds the appetite. therefore love moderately: long love doth so; too swift arrives as tardy as too slow. enter juliet. here comes the lady. o, so light a foot will ne’er wear out the everlasting flint. a lover may bestride the gossamers that idles in the wanton summer air and yet not fall; so light is vanity. juliet. good even to my ghostly confessor. friar lawrence. romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both. juliet. as much to him, else is his thanks too much. romeo. ah, juliet, if the measure of thy joy be heap’d like mine, and that thy skill be more to blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath this neighbour air, and let rich music’s tongue unfold the imagin’d happiness that both receive in either by this dear encounter. juliet. conceit more rich in matter than in words, brags of his substance, not of ornament. they are but beggars that can count their worth; but my true love is grown to such excess, i cannot sum up sum of half my wealth. friar lawrence. come, come with me, and we will make short work, for, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone till holy church incorporate two in one. [_exeunt._] act iii scene i. a public place. enter mercutio, benvolio, page and servants. benvolio. i pray thee, good mercutio, let’s retire: the day is hot, the capulets abroad, and if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl, for now these hot days, is the mad blood stirring. mercutio. thou art like one of these fellows that, when he enters the confines of a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table, and says ‘god send me no need of thee!’ and by the operation of the second cup draws him on the drawer, when indeed there is no need. benvolio. am i like such a fellow? mercutio. come, come, thou art as hot a jack in thy mood as any in italy; and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be moved. benvolio. and what to? mercutio. nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for one would kill the other. thou? why, thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast. thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes. what eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel? thy head is as full of quarrels as an egg is full of meat, and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as an egg for quarrelling. thou hast quarrelled with a man for coughing in the street, because he hath wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun. didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing his new doublet before easter? with another for tying his new shoes with an old riband? and yet thou wilt tutor me from quarrelling! benvolio. and i were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy the fee simple of my life for an hour and a quarter. mercutio. the fee simple! o simple! enter tybalt and others. benvolio. by my head, here comes the capulets. mercutio. by my heel, i care not. tybalt. follow me close, for i will speak to them. gentlemen, good-den: a word with one of you. mercutio. and but one word with one of us? couple it with something; make it a word and a blow. tybalt. you shall find me apt enough to that, sir, and you will give me occasion. mercutio. could you not take some occasion without giving? tybalt. mercutio, thou consortest with romeo. mercutio. consort? what, dost thou make us minstrels? and thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords. here’s my fiddlestick, here’s that shall make you dance. zounds, consort! benvolio. we talk here in the public haunt of men. either withdraw unto some private place, and reason coldly of your grievances, or else depart; here all eyes gaze on us. mercutio. men’s eyes were made to look, and let them gaze. i will not budge for no man’s pleasure, i. enter romeo. tybalt. well, peace be with you, sir, here comes my man. mercutio. but i’ll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery. marry, go before to field, he’ll be your follower; your worship in that sense may call him man. tybalt. romeo, the love i bear thee can afford no better term than this: thou art a villain. romeo. tybalt, the reason that i have to love thee doth much excuse the appertaining rage to such a greeting. villain am i none; therefore farewell; i see thou know’st me not. tybalt. boy, this shall not excuse the injuries that thou hast done me, therefore turn and draw. romeo. i do protest i never injur’d thee, but love thee better than thou canst devise till thou shalt know the reason of my love. and so good capulet, which name i tender as dearly as mine own, be satisfied. mercutio. o calm, dishonourable, vile submission! [_draws._] alla stoccata carries it away. tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you walk? tybalt. what wouldst thou have with me? mercutio. good king of cats, nothing but one of your nine lives; that i mean to make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter, dry-beat the rest of the eight. will you pluck your sword out of his pilcher by the ears? make haste, lest mine be about your ears ere it be out. tybalt. [_drawing._] i am for you. romeo. gentle mercutio, put thy rapier up. mercutio. come, sir, your passado. [_they fight._] romeo. draw, benvolio; beat down their weapons. gentlemen, for shame, forbear this outrage, tybalt, mercutio, the prince expressly hath forbid this bandying in verona streets. hold, tybalt! good mercutio! [_exeunt tybalt with his partizans._] mercutio. i am hurt. a plague o’ both your houses. i am sped. is he gone, and hath nothing? benvolio. what, art thou hurt? mercutio. ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. marry, ’tis enough. where is my page? go villain, fetch a surgeon. [_exit page._] romeo. courage, man; the hurt cannot be much. mercutio. no, ’tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church door, but ’tis enough, ’twill serve. ask for me tomorrow, and you shall find me a grave man. i am peppered, i warrant, for this world. a plague o’ both your houses. zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a cat, to scratch a man to death. a braggart, a rogue, a villain, that fights by the book of arithmetic!—why the devil came you between us? i was hurt under your arm. romeo. i thought all for the best. mercutio. help me into some house, benvolio, or i shall faint. a plague o’ both your houses. they have made worms’ meat of me. i have it, and soundly too. your houses! [_exeunt mercutio and benvolio._] romeo. this gentleman, the prince’s near ally, my very friend, hath got his mortal hurt in my behalf; my reputation stain’d with tybalt’s slander,—tybalt, that an hour hath been my cousin. o sweet juliet, thy beauty hath made me effeminate and in my temper soften’d valour’s steel. re-enter benvolio. benvolio. o romeo, romeo, brave mercutio’s dead, that gallant spirit hath aspir’d the clouds, which too untimely here did scorn the earth. romeo. this day’s black fate on mo days doth depend; this but begins the woe others must end. re-enter tybalt. benvolio. here comes the furious tybalt back again. romeo. again in triumph, and mercutio slain? away to heaven respective lenity, and fire-ey’d fury be my conduct now! now, tybalt, take the ‘villain’ back again that late thou gav’st me, for mercutio’s soul is but a little way above our heads, staying for thine to keep him company. either thou or i, or both, must go with him. tybalt. thou wretched boy, that didst consort him here, shalt with him hence. romeo. this shall determine that. [_they fight; tybalt falls._] benvolio. romeo, away, be gone! the citizens are up, and tybalt slain. stand not amaz’d. the prince will doom thee death if thou art taken. hence, be gone, away! romeo. o, i am fortune’s fool! benvolio. why dost thou stay? [_exit romeo._] enter citizens. first citizen. which way ran he that kill’d mercutio? tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he? benvolio. there lies that tybalt. first citizen. up, sir, go with me. i charge thee in the prince’s name obey. enter prince, attended; montague, capulet, their wives and others. prince. where are the vile beginners of this fray? benvolio. o noble prince, i can discover all the unlucky manage of this fatal brawl. there lies the man, slain by young romeo, that slew thy kinsman, brave mercutio. lady capulet. tybalt, my cousin! o my brother’s child! o prince! o husband! o, the blood is spill’d of my dear kinsman! prince, as thou art true, for blood of ours shed blood of montague. o cousin, cousin. prince. benvolio, who began this bloody fray? benvolio. tybalt, here slain, whom romeo’s hand did slay; romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink how nice the quarrel was, and urg’d withal your high displeasure. all this uttered with gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow’d could not take truce with the unruly spleen of tybalt, deaf to peace, but that he tilts with piercing steel at bold mercutio’s breast, who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point, and, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats cold death aside, and with the other sends it back to tybalt, whose dexterity retorts it. romeo he cries aloud, ‘hold, friends! friends, part!’ and swifter than his tongue, his agile arm beats down their fatal points, and ’twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm an envious thrust from tybalt hit the life of stout mercutio, and then tybalt fled. but by and by comes back to romeo, who had but newly entertain’d revenge, and to’t they go like lightning; for, ere i could draw to part them was stout tybalt slain; and as he fell did romeo turn and fly. this is the truth, or let benvolio die. lady capulet. he is a kinsman to the montague. affection makes him false, he speaks not true. some twenty of them fought in this black strife, and all those twenty could but kill one life. i beg for justice, which thou, prince, must give; romeo slew tybalt, romeo must not live. prince. romeo slew him, he slew mercutio. who now the price of his dear blood doth owe? montague. not romeo, prince, he was mercutio’s friend; his fault concludes but what the law should end, the life of tybalt. prince. and for that offence immediately we do exile him hence. i have an interest in your hate’s proceeding, my blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding. but i’ll amerce you with so strong a fine that you shall all repent the loss of mine. i will be deaf to pleading and excuses; nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses. therefore use none. let romeo hence in haste, else, when he is found, that hour is his last. bear hence this body, and attend our will. mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill. [_exeunt._] scene ii. a room in capulet’s house. enter juliet. juliet. gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds, towards phoebus’ lodging. such a waggoner as phaeton would whip you to the west and bring in cloudy night immediately. spread thy close curtain, love-performing night, that runaway’s eyes may wink, and romeo leap to these arms, untalk’d of and unseen. lovers can see to do their amorous rites by their own beauties: or, if love be blind, it best agrees with night. come, civil night, thou sober-suited matron, all in black, and learn me how to lose a winning match, play’d for a pair of stainless maidenhoods. hood my unmann’d blood, bating in my cheeks, with thy black mantle, till strange love, grow bold, think true love acted simple modesty. come, night, come romeo; come, thou day in night; for thou wilt lie upon the wings of night whiter than new snow upon a raven’s back. come gentle night, come loving black-brow’d night, give me my romeo, and when i shall die, take him and cut him out in little stars, and he will make the face of heaven so fine that all the world will be in love with night, and pay no worship to the garish sun. o, i have bought the mansion of a love, but not possess’d it; and though i am sold, not yet enjoy’d. so tedious is this day as is the night before some festival to an impatient child that hath new robes and may not wear them. o, here comes my nurse, and she brings news, and every tongue that speaks but romeo’s name speaks heavenly eloquence. enter nurse, with cords. now, nurse, what news? what hast thou there? the cords that romeo bid thee fetch? nurse. ay, ay, the cords. [_throws them down._] juliet. ay me, what news? why dost thou wring thy hands? nurse. ah, well-a-day, he’s dead, he’s dead, he’s dead! we are undone, lady, we are undone. alack the day, he’s gone, he’s kill’d, he’s dead. juliet. can heaven be so envious? nurse. romeo can, though heaven cannot. o romeo, romeo. who ever would have thought it? romeo! juliet. what devil art thou, that dost torment me thus? this torture should be roar’d in dismal hell. hath romeo slain himself? say thou but ay, and that bare vowel i shall poison more than the death-darting eye of cockatrice. i am not i if there be such an i; or those eyes shut that make thee answer ay. if he be slain, say ay; or if not, no. brief sounds determine of my weal or woe. nurse. i saw the wound, i saw it with mine eyes, god save the mark!—here on his manly breast. a piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse; pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub’d in blood, all in gore-blood. i swounded at the sight. juliet. o, break, my heart. poor bankrout, break at once. to prison, eyes; ne’er look on liberty. vile earth to earth resign; end motion here, and thou and romeo press one heavy bier. nurse. o tybalt, tybalt, the best friend i had. o courteous tybalt, honest gentleman! that ever i should live to see thee dead. juliet. what storm is this that blows so contrary? is romeo slaughter’d and is tybalt dead? my dearest cousin, and my dearer lord? then dreadful trumpet sound the general doom, for who is living, if those two are gone? nurse. tybalt is gone, and romeo banished, romeo that kill’d him, he is banished. juliet. o god! did romeo’s hand shed tybalt’s blood? nurse. it did, it did; alas the day, it did. juliet. o serpent heart, hid with a flowering face! did ever dragon keep so fair a cave? beautiful tyrant, fiend angelical, dove-feather’d raven, wolvish-ravening lamb! despised substance of divinest show! just opposite to what thou justly seem’st, a damned saint, an honourable villain! o nature, what hadst thou to do in hell when thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend in mortal paradise of such sweet flesh? was ever book containing such vile matter so fairly bound? o, that deceit should dwell in such a gorgeous palace. nurse. there’s no trust, no faith, no honesty in men. all perjur’d, all forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers. ah, where’s my man? give me some aqua vitae. these griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old. shame come to romeo. juliet. blister’d be thy tongue for such a wish! he was not born to shame. upon his brow shame is asham’d to sit; for ’tis a throne where honour may be crown’d sole monarch of the universal earth. o, what a beast was i to chide at him! nurse. will you speak well of him that kill’d your cousin? juliet. shall i speak ill of him that is my husband? ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name, when i thy three-hours’ wife have mangled it? but wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin? that villain cousin would have kill’d my husband. back, foolish tears, back to your native spring, your tributary drops belong to woe, which you mistaking offer up to joy. my husband lives, that tybalt would have slain, and tybalt’s dead, that would have slain my husband. all this is comfort; wherefore weep i then? some word there was, worser than tybalt’s death, that murder’d me. i would forget it fain, but o, it presses to my memory like damned guilty deeds to sinners’ minds. tybalt is dead, and romeo banished. that ‘banished,’ that one word ‘banished,’ hath slain ten thousand tybalts. tybalt’s death was woe enough, if it had ended there. or if sour woe delights in fellowship, and needly will be rank’d with other griefs, why follow’d not, when she said tybalt’s dead, thy father or thy mother, nay or both, which modern lamentation might have mov’d? but with a rear-ward following tybalt’s death, ‘romeo is banished’—to speak that word is father, mother, tybalt, romeo, juliet, all slain, all dead. romeo is banished, there is no end, no limit, measure, bound, in that word’s death, no words can that woe sound. where is my father and my mother, nurse? nurse. weeping and wailing over tybalt’s corse. will you go to them? i will bring you thither. juliet. wash they his wounds with tears. mine shall be spent, when theirs are dry, for romeo’s banishment. take up those cords. poor ropes, you are beguil’d, both you and i; for romeo is exil’d. he made you for a highway to my bed, but i, a maid, die maiden-widowed. come cords, come nurse, i’ll to my wedding bed, and death, not romeo, take my maidenhead. nurse. hie to your chamber. i’ll find romeo to comfort you. i wot well where he is. hark ye, your romeo will be here at night. i’ll to him, he is hid at lawrence’ cell. juliet. o find him, give this ring to my true knight, and bid him come to take his last farewell. [_exeunt._] scene iii. friar lawrence’s cell. enter friar lawrence. friar lawrence. romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man. affliction is enanmour’d of thy parts and thou art wedded to calamity. enter romeo. romeo. father, what news? what is the prince’s doom? what sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand, that i yet know not? friar lawrence. too familiar is my dear son with such sour company. i bring thee tidings of the prince’s doom. romeo. what less than doomsday is the prince’s doom? friar lawrence. a gentler judgment vanish’d from his lips, not body’s death, but body’s banishment. romeo. ha, banishment? be merciful, say death; for exile hath more terror in his look, much more than death. do not say banishment. friar lawrence. hence from verona art thou banished. be patient, for the world is broad and wide. romeo. there is no world without verona walls, but purgatory, torture, hell itself. hence banished is banish’d from the world, and world’s exile is death. then banished is death misterm’d. calling death banished, thou cutt’st my head off with a golden axe, and smilest upon the stroke that murders me. friar lawrence. o deadly sin, o rude unthankfulness! thy fault our law calls death, but the kind prince, taking thy part, hath brush’d aside the law, and turn’d that black word death to banishment. this is dear mercy, and thou see’st it not. romeo. ’tis torture, and not mercy. heaven is here where juliet lives, and every cat and dog, and little mouse, every unworthy thing, live here in heaven and may look on her, but romeo may not. more validity, more honourable state, more courtship lives in carrion flies than romeo. they may seize on the white wonder of dear juliet’s hand, and steal immortal blessing from her lips, who, even in pure and vestal modesty still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin. but romeo may not, he is banished. this may flies do, when i from this must fly. they are free men but i am banished. and say’st thou yet that exile is not death? hadst thou no poison mix’d, no sharp-ground knife, no sudden mean of death, though ne’er so mean, but banished to kill me? banished? o friar, the damned use that word in hell. howling attends it. how hast thou the heart, being a divine, a ghostly confessor, a sin-absolver, and my friend profess’d, to mangle me with that word banished? friar lawrence. thou fond mad man, hear me speak a little, romeo. o, thou wilt speak again of banishment. friar lawrence. i’ll give thee armour to keep off that word, adversity’s sweet milk, philosophy, to comfort thee, though thou art banished. romeo. yet banished? hang up philosophy. unless philosophy can make a juliet, displant a town, reverse a prince’s doom, it helps not, it prevails not, talk no more. friar lawrence. o, then i see that mad men have no ears. romeo. how should they, when that wise men have no eyes? friar lawrence. let me dispute with thee of thy estate. romeo. thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel. wert thou as young as i, juliet thy love, an hour but married, tybalt murdered, doting like me, and like me banished, then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair, and fall upon the ground as i do now, taking the measure of an unmade grave. [_knocking within._] friar lawrence. arise; one knocks. good romeo, hide thyself. romeo. not i, unless the breath of heartsick groans mist-like infold me from the search of eyes. [_knocking._] friar lawrence. hark, how they knock!—who’s there?—romeo, arise, thou wilt be taken.—stay awhile.—stand up. [_knocking._] run to my study.—by-and-by.—god’s will, what simpleness is this.—i come, i come. [_knocking._] who knocks so hard? whence come you, what’s your will? nurse. [_within._] let me come in, and you shall know my errand. i come from lady juliet. friar lawrence. welcome then. enter nurse. nurse. o holy friar, o, tell me, holy friar, where is my lady’s lord, where’s romeo? friar lawrence. there on the ground, with his own tears made drunk. nurse. o, he is even in my mistress’ case. just in her case! o woeful sympathy! piteous predicament. even so lies she, blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering. stand up, stand up; stand, and you be a man. for juliet’s sake, for her sake, rise and stand. why should you fall into so deep an o? romeo. nurse. nurse. ah sir, ah sir, death’s the end of all. romeo. spakest thou of juliet? how is it with her? doth not she think me an old murderer, now i have stain’d the childhood of our joy with blood remov’d but little from her own? where is she? and how doth she? and what says my conceal’d lady to our cancell’d love? nurse. o, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps; and now falls on her bed, and then starts up, and tybalt calls, and then on romeo cries, and then down falls again. romeo. as if that name, shot from the deadly level of a gun, did murder her, as that name’s cursed hand murder’d her kinsman. o, tell me, friar, tell me, in what vile part of this anatomy doth my name lodge? tell me, that i may sack the hateful mansion. [_drawing his sword._] friar lawrence. hold thy desperate hand. art thou a man? thy form cries out thou art. thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote the unreasonable fury of a beast. unseemly woman in a seeming man, and ill-beseeming beast in seeming both! thou hast amaz’d me. by my holy order, i thought thy disposition better temper’d. hast thou slain tybalt? wilt thou slay thyself? and slay thy lady, that in thy life lives, by doing damned hate upon thyself? why rail’st thou on thy birth, the heaven and earth? since birth, and heaven and earth, all three do meet in thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose. fie, fie, thou sham’st thy shape, thy love, thy wit, which, like a usurer, abound’st in all, and usest none in that true use indeed which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit. thy noble shape is but a form of wax, digressing from the valour of a man; thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury, killing that love which thou hast vow’d to cherish; thy wit, that ornament to shape and love, misshapen in the conduct of them both, like powder in a skilless soldier’s flask, is set afire by thine own ignorance, and thou dismember’d with thine own defence. what, rouse thee, man. thy juliet is alive, for whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead. there art thou happy. tybalt would kill thee, but thou slew’st tybalt; there art thou happy. the law that threaten’d death becomes thy friend, and turns it to exile; there art thou happy. a pack of blessings light upon thy back; happiness courts thee in her best array; but like a misshaped and sullen wench, thou putt’st up thy fortune and thy love. take heed, take heed, for such die miserable. go, get thee to thy love as was decreed, ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her. but look thou stay not till the watch be set, for then thou canst not pass to mantua; where thou shalt live till we can find a time to blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends, beg pardon of the prince, and call thee back with twenty hundred thousand times more joy than thou went’st forth in lamentation. go before, nurse. commend me to thy lady, and bid her hasten all the house to bed, which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto. romeo is coming. nurse. o lord, i could have stay’d here all the night to hear good counsel. o, what learning is! my lord, i’ll tell my lady you will come. romeo. do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide. nurse. here sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir. hie you, make haste, for it grows very late. [_exit._] romeo. how well my comfort is reviv’d by this. friar lawrence. go hence, good night, and here stands all your state: either be gone before the watch be set, or by the break of day disguis’d from hence. sojourn in mantua. i’ll find out your man, and he shall signify from time to time every good hap to you that chances here. give me thy hand; ’tis late; farewell; good night. romeo. but that a joy past joy calls out on me, it were a grief so brief to part with thee. farewell. [_exeunt._] scene iv. a room in capulet’s house. enter capulet, lady capulet and paris. capulet. things have fallen out, sir, so unluckily that we have had no time to move our daughter. look you, she lov’d her kinsman tybalt dearly, and so did i. well, we were born to die. ’tis very late; she’ll not come down tonight. i promise you, but for your company, i would have been abed an hour ago. paris. these times of woe afford no tune to woo. madam, good night. commend me to your daughter. lady capulet. i will, and know her mind early tomorrow; tonight she’s mew’d up to her heaviness. capulet. sir paris, i will make a desperate tender of my child’s love. i think she will be rul’d in all respects by me; nay more, i doubt it not. wife, go you to her ere you go to bed, acquaint her here of my son paris’ love, and bid her, mark you me, on wednesday next, but, soft, what day is this? paris. monday, my lord. capulet. monday! ha, ha! well, wednesday is too soon, a thursday let it be; a thursday, tell her, she shall be married to this noble earl. will you be ready? do you like this haste? we’ll keep no great ado,—a friend or two, for, hark you, tybalt being slain so late, it may be thought we held him carelessly, being our kinsman, if we revel much. therefore we’ll have some half a dozen friends, and there an end. but what say you to thursday? paris. my lord, i would that thursday were tomorrow. capulet. well, get you gone. a thursday be it then. go you to juliet ere you go to bed, prepare her, wife, against this wedding day. farewell, my lord.—light to my chamber, ho! afore me, it is so very very late that we may call it early by and by. good night. [_exeunt._] scene v. an open gallery to juliet’s chamber, overlooking the garden. enter romeo and juliet. juliet. wilt thou be gone? it is not yet near day. it was the nightingale, and not the lark, that pierc’d the fearful hollow of thine ear; nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree. believe me, love, it was the nightingale. romeo. it was the lark, the herald of the morn, no nightingale. look, love, what envious streaks do lace the severing clouds in yonder east. night’s candles are burnt out, and jocund day stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops. i must be gone and live, or stay and die. juliet. yond light is not daylight, i know it, i. it is some meteor that the sun exhales to be to thee this night a torchbearer and light thee on thy way to mantua. therefore stay yet, thou need’st not to be gone. romeo. let me be ta’en, let me be put to death, i am content, so thou wilt have it so. i’ll say yon grey is not the morning’s eye, ’tis but the pale reflex of cynthia’s brow. nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat the vaulty heaven so high above our heads. i have more care to stay than will to go. come, death, and welcome. juliet wills it so. how is’t, my soul? let’s talk. it is not day. juliet. it is, it is! hie hence, be gone, away. it is the lark that sings so out of tune, straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps. some say the lark makes sweet division; this doth not so, for she divideth us. some say the lark and loathed toad change eyes. o, now i would they had chang’d voices too, since arm from arm that voice doth us affray, hunting thee hence with hunt’s-up to the day. o now be gone, more light and light it grows. romeo. more light and light, more dark and dark our woes. enter nurse. nurse. madam. juliet. nurse? nurse. your lady mother is coming to your chamber. the day is broke, be wary, look about. [_exit._] juliet. then, window, let day in, and let life out. romeo. farewell, farewell, one kiss, and i’ll descend. [_descends._] juliet. art thou gone so? love, lord, ay husband, friend, i must hear from thee every day in the hour, for in a minute there are many days. o, by this count i shall be much in years ere i again behold my romeo. romeo. farewell! i will omit no opportunity that may convey my greetings, love, to thee. juliet. o thinkest thou we shall ever meet again? romeo. i doubt it not, and all these woes shall serve for sweet discourses in our time to come. juliet. o god! i have an ill-divining soul! methinks i see thee, now thou art so low, as one dead in the bottom of a tomb. either my eyesight fails, or thou look’st pale. romeo. and trust me, love, in my eye so do you. dry sorrow drinks our blood. adieu, adieu. [_exit below._] juliet. o fortune, fortune! all men call thee fickle, if thou art fickle, what dost thou with him that is renown’d for faith? be fickle, fortune; for then, i hope thou wilt not keep him long but send him back. lady capulet. [_within._] ho, daughter, are you up? juliet. who is’t that calls? is it my lady mother? is she not down so late, or up so early? what unaccustom’d cause procures her hither? enter lady capulet. lady capulet. why, how now, juliet? juliet. madam, i am not well. lady capulet. evermore weeping for your cousin’s death? what, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears? and if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live. therefore have done: some grief shows much of love, but much of grief shows still some want of wit. juliet. yet let me weep for such a feeling loss. lady capulet. so shall you feel the loss, but not the friend which you weep for. juliet. feeling so the loss, i cannot choose but ever weep the friend. lady capulet. well, girl, thou weep’st not so much for his death as that the villain lives which slaughter’d him. juliet. what villain, madam? lady capulet. that same villain romeo. juliet. villain and he be many miles asunder. god pardon him. i do, with all my heart. and yet no man like he doth grieve my heart. lady capulet. that is because the traitor murderer lives. juliet. ay madam, from the reach of these my hands. would none but i might venge my cousin’s death. lady capulet. we will have vengeance for it, fear thou not. then weep no more. i’ll send to one in mantua, where that same banish’d runagate doth live, shall give him such an unaccustom’d dram that he shall soon keep tybalt company: and then i hope thou wilt be satisfied. juliet. indeed i never shall be satisfied with romeo till i behold him—dead— is my poor heart so for a kinsman vex’d. madam, if you could find out but a man to bear a poison, i would temper it, that romeo should upon receipt thereof, soon sleep in quiet. o, how my heart abhors to hear him nam’d, and cannot come to him, to wreak the love i bore my cousin upon his body that hath slaughter’d him. lady capulet. find thou the means, and i’ll find such a man. but now i’ll tell thee joyful tidings, girl. juliet. and joy comes well in such a needy time. what are they, i beseech your ladyship? lady capulet. well, well, thou hast a careful father, child; one who to put thee from thy heaviness, hath sorted out a sudden day of joy, that thou expects not, nor i look’d not for. juliet. madam, in happy time, what day is that? lady capulet. marry, my child, early next thursday morn the gallant, young, and noble gentleman, the county paris, at saint peter’s church, shall happily make thee there a joyful bride. juliet. now by saint peter’s church, and peter too, he shall not make me there a joyful bride. i wonder at this haste, that i must wed ere he that should be husband comes to woo. i pray you tell my lord and father, madam, i will not marry yet; and when i do, i swear it shall be romeo, whom you know i hate, rather than paris. these are news indeed. lady capulet. here comes your father, tell him so yourself, and see how he will take it at your hands. enter capulet and nurse. capulet. when the sun sets, the air doth drizzle dew; but for the sunset of my brother’s son it rains downright. how now? a conduit, girl? what, still in tears? evermore showering? in one little body thou counterfeits a bark, a sea, a wind. for still thy eyes, which i may call the sea, do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is, sailing in this salt flood, the winds, thy sighs, who raging with thy tears and they with them, without a sudden calm will overset thy tempest-tossed body. how now, wife? have you deliver’d to her our decree? lady capulet. ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks. i would the fool were married to her grave. capulet. soft. take me with you, take me with you, wife. how, will she none? doth she not give us thanks? is she not proud? doth she not count her blest, unworthy as she is, that we have wrought so worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom? juliet. not proud you have, but thankful that you have. proud can i never be of what i hate; but thankful even for hate that is meant love. capulet. how now, how now, chopp’d logic? what is this? proud, and, i thank you, and i thank you not; and yet not proud. mistress minion you, thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds, but fettle your fine joints ’gainst thursday next to go with paris to saint peter’s church, or i will drag thee on a hurdle thither. out, you green-sickness carrion! out, you baggage! you tallow-face! lady capulet. fie, fie! what, are you mad? juliet. good father, i beseech you on my knees, hear me with patience but to speak a word. capulet. hang thee young baggage, disobedient wretch! i tell thee what,—get thee to church a thursday, or never after look me in the face. speak not, reply not, do not answer me. my fingers itch. wife, we scarce thought us blest that god had lent us but this only child; but now i see this one is one too much, and that we have a curse in having her. out on her, hilding. nurse. god in heaven bless her. you are to blame, my lord, to rate her so. capulet. and why, my lady wisdom? hold your tongue, good prudence; smatter with your gossips, go. nurse. i speak no treason. capulet. o god ye good-en! nurse. may not one speak? capulet. peace, you mumbling fool! utter your gravity o’er a gossip’s bowl, for here we need it not. lady capulet. you are too hot. capulet. god’s bread, it makes me mad! day, night, hour, ride, time, work, play, alone, in company, still my care hath been to have her match’d, and having now provided a gentleman of noble parentage, of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly allied, stuff’d, as they say, with honourable parts, proportion’d as one’s thought would wish a man, and then to have a wretched puling fool, a whining mammet, in her fortune’s tender, to answer, ‘i’ll not wed, i cannot love, i am too young, i pray you pardon me.’ but, and you will not wed, i’ll pardon you. graze where you will, you shall not house with me. look to’t, think on’t, i do not use to jest. thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise. and you be mine, i’ll give you to my friend; and you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets, for by my soul, i’ll ne’er acknowledge thee, nor what is mine shall never do thee good. trust to’t, bethink you, i’ll not be forsworn. [_exit._] juliet. is there no pity sitting in the clouds, that sees into the bottom of my grief? o sweet my mother, cast me not away, delay this marriage for a month, a week, or, if you do not, make the bridal bed in that dim monument where tybalt lies. lady capulet. talk not to me, for i’ll not speak a word. do as thou wilt, for i have done with thee. [_exit._] juliet. o god! o nurse, how shall this be prevented? my husband is on earth, my faith in heaven. how shall that faith return again to earth, unless that husband send it me from heaven by leaving earth? comfort me, counsel me. alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems upon so soft a subject as myself. what say’st thou? hast thou not a word of joy? some comfort, nurse. nurse. faith, here it is. romeo is banished; and all the world to nothing that he dares ne’er come back to challenge you. or if he do, it needs must be by stealth. then, since the case so stands as now it doth, i think it best you married with the county. o, he’s a lovely gentleman. romeo’s a dishclout to him. an eagle, madam, hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye as paris hath. beshrew my very heart, i think you are happy in this second match, for it excels your first: or if it did not, your first is dead, or ’twere as good he were, as living here and you no use of him. juliet. speakest thou from thy heart? nurse. and from my soul too, or else beshrew them both. juliet. amen. nurse. what? juliet. well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much. go in, and tell my lady i am gone, having displeas’d my father, to lawrence’ cell, to make confession and to be absolv’d. nurse. marry, i will; and this is wisely done. [_exit._] juliet. ancient damnation! o most wicked fiend! is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn, or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue which she hath prais’d him with above compare so many thousand times? go, counsellor. thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain. i’ll to the friar to know his remedy. if all else fail, myself have power to die. [_exit._] act iv scene i. friar lawrence’s cell. enter friar lawrence and paris. friar lawrence. on thursday, sir? the time is very short. paris. my father capulet will have it so; and i am nothing slow to slack his haste. friar lawrence. you say you do not know the lady’s mind. uneven is the course; i like it not. paris. immoderately she weeps for tybalt’s death, and therefore have i little talk’d of love; for venus smiles not in a house of tears. now, sir, her father counts it dangerous that she do give her sorrow so much sway; and in his wisdom, hastes our marriage, to stop the inundation of her tears, which, too much minded by herself alone, may be put from her by society. now do you know the reason of this haste. friar lawrence. [_aside._] i would i knew not why it should be slow’d.— look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell. enter juliet. paris. happily met, my lady and my wife! juliet. that may be, sir, when i may be a wife. paris. that may be, must be, love, on thursday next. juliet. what must be shall be. friar lawrence. that’s a certain text. paris. come you to make confession to this father? juliet. to answer that, i should confess to you. paris. do not deny to him that you love me. juliet. i will confess to you that i love him. paris. so will ye, i am sure, that you love me. juliet. if i do so, it will be of more price, being spoke behind your back than to your face. paris. poor soul, thy face is much abus’d with tears. juliet. the tears have got small victory by that; for it was bad enough before their spite. paris. thou wrong’st it more than tears with that report. juliet. that is no slander, sir, which is a truth, and what i spake, i spake it to my face. paris. thy face is mine, and thou hast slander’d it. juliet. it may be so, for it is not mine own. are you at leisure, holy father, now, or shall i come to you at evening mass? friar lawrence. my leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.— my lord, we must entreat the time alone. paris. god shield i should disturb devotion!— juliet, on thursday early will i rouse ye, till then, adieu; and keep this holy kiss. [_exit._] juliet. o shut the door, and when thou hast done so, come weep with me, past hope, past cure, past help! friar lawrence. o juliet, i already know thy grief; it strains me past the compass of my wits. i hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it, on thursday next be married to this county. juliet. tell me not, friar, that thou hear’st of this, unless thou tell me how i may prevent it. if in thy wisdom, thou canst give no help, do thou but call my resolution wise, and with this knife i’ll help it presently. god join’d my heart and romeo’s, thou our hands; and ere this hand, by thee to romeo’s seal’d, shall be the label to another deed, or my true heart with treacherous revolt turn to another, this shall slay them both. therefore, out of thy long-experienc’d time, give me some present counsel, or behold ’twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife shall play the empire, arbitrating that which the commission of thy years and art could to no issue of true honour bring. be not so long to speak. i long to die, if what thou speak’st speak not of remedy. friar lawrence. hold, daughter. i do spy a kind of hope, which craves as desperate an execution as that is desperate which we would prevent. if, rather than to marry county paris thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself, then is it likely thou wilt undertake a thing like death to chide away this shame, that cop’st with death himself to scape from it. and if thou dar’st, i’ll give thee remedy. juliet. o, bid me leap, rather than marry paris, from off the battlements of yonder tower, or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk where serpents are. chain me with roaring bears; or hide me nightly in a charnel-house, o’er-cover’d quite with dead men’s rattling bones, with reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls. or bid me go into a new-made grave, and hide me with a dead man in his shroud; things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble, and i will do it without fear or doubt, to live an unstain’d wife to my sweet love. friar lawrence. hold then. go home, be merry, give consent to marry paris. wednesday is tomorrow; tomorrow night look that thou lie alone, let not thy nurse lie with thee in thy chamber. take thou this vial, being then in bed, and this distilled liquor drink thou off, when presently through all thy veins shall run a cold and drowsy humour; for no pulse shall keep his native progress, but surcease. no warmth, no breath shall testify thou livest, the roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade to paly ashes; thy eyes’ windows fall, like death when he shuts up the day of life. each part depriv’d of supple government, shall stiff and stark and cold appear like death. and in this borrow’d likeness of shrunk death thou shalt continue two and forty hours, and then awake as from a pleasant sleep. now when the bridegroom in the morning comes to rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead. then as the manner of our country is, in thy best robes, uncover’d, on the bier, thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault where all the kindred of the capulets lie. in the meantime, against thou shalt awake, shall romeo by my letters know our drift, and hither shall he come, and he and i will watch thy waking, and that very night shall romeo bear thee hence to mantua. and this shall free thee from this present shame, if no inconstant toy nor womanish fear abate thy valour in the acting it. juliet. give me, give me! o tell not me of fear! friar lawrence. hold; get you gone, be strong and prosperous in this resolve. i’ll send a friar with speed to mantua, with my letters to thy lord. juliet. love give me strength, and strength shall help afford. farewell, dear father. [_exeunt._] scene ii. hall in capulet’s house. enter capulet, lady capulet, nurse and servants. capulet. so many guests invite as here are writ. [_exit first servant._] sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks. second servant. you shall have none ill, sir; for i’ll try if they can lick their fingers. capulet. how canst thou try them so? second servant. marry, sir, ’tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own fingers; therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with me. capulet. go, begone. [_exit second servant._] we shall be much unfurnish’d for this time. what, is my daughter gone to friar lawrence? nurse. ay, forsooth. capulet. well, he may chance to do some good on her. a peevish self-will’d harlotry it is. enter juliet. nurse. see where she comes from shrift with merry look. capulet. how now, my headstrong. where have you been gadding? juliet. where i have learnt me to repent the sin of disobedient opposition to you and your behests; and am enjoin’d by holy lawrence to fall prostrate here, to beg your pardon. pardon, i beseech you. henceforward i am ever rul’d by you. capulet. send for the county, go tell him of this. i’ll have this knot knit up tomorrow morning. juliet. i met the youthful lord at lawrence’ cell, and gave him what becomed love i might, not stepping o’er the bounds of modesty. capulet. why, i am glad on’t. this is well. stand up. this is as’t should be. let me see the county. ay, marry. go, i say, and fetch him hither. now afore god, this reverend holy friar, all our whole city is much bound to him. juliet. nurse, will you go with me into my closet, to help me sort such needful ornaments as you think fit to furnish me tomorrow? lady capulet. no, not till thursday. there is time enough. capulet. go, nurse, go with her. we’ll to church tomorrow. [_exeunt juliet and nurse._] lady capulet. we shall be short in our provision, ’tis now near night. capulet. tush, i will stir about, and all things shall be well, i warrant thee, wife. go thou to juliet, help to deck up her. i’ll not to bed tonight, let me alone. i’ll play the housewife for this once.—what, ho!— they are all forth: well, i will walk myself to county paris, to prepare him up against tomorrow. my heart is wondrous light since this same wayward girl is so reclaim’d. [_exeunt._] scene iii. juliet’s chamber. enter juliet and nurse. juliet. ay, those attires are best. but, gentle nurse, i pray thee leave me to myself tonight; for i have need of many orisons to move the heavens to smile upon my state, which, well thou know’st, is cross and full of sin. enter lady capulet. lady capulet. what, are you busy, ho? need you my help? juliet. no, madam; we have cull’d such necessaries as are behoveful for our state tomorrow. so please you, let me now be left alone, and let the nurse this night sit up with you, for i am sure you have your hands full all in this so sudden business. lady capulet. good night. get thee to bed and rest, for thou hast need. [_exeunt lady capulet and nurse._] juliet. farewell. god knows when we shall meet again. i have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins that almost freezes up the heat of life. i’ll call them back again to comfort me. nurse!—what should she do here? my dismal scene i needs must act alone. come, vial. what if this mixture do not work at all? shall i be married then tomorrow morning? no, no! this shall forbid it. lie thou there. [_laying down her dagger._] what if it be a poison, which the friar subtly hath minister’d to have me dead, lest in this marriage he should be dishonour’d, because he married me before to romeo? i fear it is. and yet methinks it should not, for he hath still been tried a holy man. how if, when i am laid into the tomb, i wake before the time that romeo come to redeem me? there’s a fearful point! shall i not then be stifled in the vault, to whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in, and there die strangled ere my romeo comes? or, if i live, is it not very like, the horrible conceit of death and night, together with the terror of the place, as in a vault, an ancient receptacle, where for this many hundred years the bones of all my buried ancestors are pack’d, where bloody tybalt, yet but green in earth, lies festering in his shroud; where, as they say, at some hours in the night spirits resort— alack, alack, is it not like that i, so early waking, what with loathsome smells, and shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth, that living mortals, hearing them, run mad. o, if i wake, shall i not be distraught, environed with all these hideous fears, and madly play with my forefathers’ joints? and pluck the mangled tybalt from his shroud? and, in this rage, with some great kinsman’s bone, as with a club, dash out my desperate brains? o look, methinks i see my cousin’s ghost seeking out romeo that did spit his body upon a rapier’s point. stay, tybalt, stay! romeo, romeo, romeo, here’s drink! i drink to thee. [_throws herself on the bed._] scene iv. hall in capulet’s house. enter lady capulet and nurse. lady capulet. hold, take these keys and fetch more spices, nurse. nurse. they call for dates and quinces in the pastry. enter capulet. capulet. come, stir, stir, stir! the second cock hath crow’d, the curfew bell hath rung, ’tis three o’clock. look to the bak’d meats, good angelica; spare not for cost. nurse. go, you cot-quean, go, get you to bed; faith, you’ll be sick tomorrow for this night’s watching. capulet. no, not a whit. what! i have watch’d ere now all night for lesser cause, and ne’er been sick. lady capulet. ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time; but i will watch you from such watching now. [_exeunt lady capulet and nurse._] capulet. a jealous-hood, a jealous-hood! enter servants, with spits, logs and baskets. now, fellow, what’s there? first servant. things for the cook, sir; but i know not what. capulet. make haste, make haste. [_exit first servant._] —sirrah, fetch drier logs. call peter, he will show thee where they are. second servant. i have a head, sir, that will find out logs and never trouble peter for the matter. [_exit._] capulet. mass and well said; a merry whoreson, ha. thou shalt be loggerhead.—good faith, ’tis day. the county will be here with music straight, for so he said he would. i hear him near. [_play music._] nurse! wife! what, ho! what, nurse, i say! re-enter nurse. go waken juliet, go and trim her up. i’ll go and chat with paris. hie, make haste, make haste; the bridegroom he is come already. make haste i say. [_exeunt._] scene v. juliet’s chamber; juliet on the bed. enter nurse. nurse. mistress! what, mistress! juliet! fast, i warrant her, she. why, lamb, why, lady, fie, you slug-abed! why, love, i say! madam! sweetheart! why, bride! what, not a word? you take your pennyworths now. sleep for a week; for the next night, i warrant, the county paris hath set up his rest that you shall rest but little. god forgive me! marry and amen. how sound is she asleep! i needs must wake her. madam, madam, madam! ay, let the county take you in your bed, he’ll fright you up, i’faith. will it not be? what, dress’d, and in your clothes, and down again? i must needs wake you. lady! lady! lady! alas, alas! help, help! my lady’s dead! o, well-a-day that ever i was born. some aqua vitae, ho! my lord! my lady! enter lady capulet. lady capulet. what noise is here? nurse. o lamentable day! lady capulet. what is the matter? nurse. look, look! o heavy day! lady capulet. o me, o me! my child, my only life. revive, look up, or i will die with thee. help, help! call help. enter capulet. capulet. for shame, bring juliet forth, her lord is come. nurse. she’s dead, deceas’d, she’s dead; alack the day! lady capulet. alack the day, she’s dead, she’s dead, she’s dead! capulet. ha! let me see her. out alas! she’s cold, her blood is settled and her joints are stiff. life and these lips have long been separated. death lies on her like an untimely frost upon the sweetest flower of all the field. nurse. o lamentable day! lady capulet. o woful time! capulet. death, that hath ta’en her hence to make me wail, ties up my tongue and will not let me speak. enter friar lawrence and paris with musicians. friar lawrence. come, is the bride ready to go to church? capulet. ready to go, but never to return. o son, the night before thy wedding day hath death lain with thy bride. there she lies, flower as she was, deflowered by him. death is my son-in-law, death is my heir; my daughter he hath wedded. i will die and leave him all; life, living, all is death’s. paris. have i thought long to see this morning’s face, and doth it give me such a sight as this? lady capulet. accurs’d, unhappy, wretched, hateful day. most miserable hour that e’er time saw in lasting labour of his pilgrimage. but one, poor one, one poor and loving child, but one thing to rejoice and solace in, and cruel death hath catch’d it from my sight. nurse. o woe! o woeful, woeful, woeful day. most lamentable day, most woeful day that ever, ever, i did yet behold! o day, o day, o day, o hateful day. never was seen so black a day as this. o woeful day, o woeful day. paris. beguil’d, divorced, wronged, spited, slain. most detestable death, by thee beguil’d, by cruel, cruel thee quite overthrown. o love! o life! not life, but love in death! capulet. despis’d, distressed, hated, martyr’d, kill’d. uncomfortable time, why cam’st thou now to murder, murder our solemnity? o child! o child! my soul, and not my child, dead art thou. alack, my child is dead, and with my child my joys are buried. friar lawrence. peace, ho, for shame. confusion’s cure lives not in these confusions. heaven and yourself had part in this fair maid, now heaven hath all, and all the better is it for the maid. your part in her you could not keep from death, but heaven keeps his part in eternal life. the most you sought was her promotion, for ’twas your heaven she should be advanc’d, and weep ye now, seeing she is advanc’d above the clouds, as high as heaven itself? o, in this love, you love your child so ill that you run mad, seeing that she is well. she’s not well married that lives married long, but she’s best married that dies married young. dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary on this fair corse, and, as the custom is, and in her best array bear her to church; for though fond nature bids us all lament, yet nature’s tears are reason’s merriment. capulet. all things that we ordained festival turn from their office to black funeral: our instruments to melancholy bells, our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast; our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change; our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse, and all things change them to the contrary. friar lawrence. sir, go you in, and, madam, go with him, and go, sir paris, everyone prepare to follow this fair corse unto her grave. the heavens do lower upon you for some ill; move them no more by crossing their high will. [_exeunt capulet, lady capulet, paris and friar._] first musician. faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone. nurse. honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up, for well you know this is a pitiful case. first musician. ay, by my troth, the case may be amended. [_exit nurse._] enter peter. peter. musicians, o, musicians, ‘heart’s ease,’ ‘heart’s ease’, o, and you will have me live, play ‘heart’s ease.’ first musician. why ‘heart’s ease’? peter. o musicians, because my heart itself plays ‘my heart is full’. o play me some merry dump to comfort me. first musician. not a dump we, ’tis no time to play now. peter. you will not then? first musician. no. peter. i will then give it you soundly. first musician. what will you give us? peter. no money, on my faith, but the gleek! i will give you the minstrel. first musician. then will i give you the serving-creature. peter. then will i lay the serving-creature’s dagger on your pate. i will carry no crotchets. i’ll re you, i’ll fa you. do you note me? first musician. and you re us and fa us, you note us. second musician. pray you put up your dagger, and put out your wit. peter. then have at you with my wit. i will dry-beat you with an iron wit, and put up my iron dagger. answer me like men. ‘when griping griefs the heart doth wound, and doleful dumps the mind oppress, then music with her silver sound’— why ‘silver sound’? why ‘music with her silver sound’? what say you, simon catling? first musician. marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound. peter. prates. what say you, hugh rebeck? second musician. i say ‘silver sound’ because musicians sound for silver. peter. prates too! what say you, james soundpost? third musician. faith, i know not what to say. peter. o, i cry you mercy, you are the singer. i will say for you. it is ‘music with her silver sound’ because musicians have no gold for sounding. ‘then music with her silver sound with speedy help doth lend redress.’ [_exit._] first musician. what a pestilent knave is this same! second musician. hang him, jack. come, we’ll in here, tarry for the mourners, and stay dinner. [_exeunt._] act v scene i. mantua. a street. enter romeo. romeo. if i may trust the flattering eye of sleep, my dreams presage some joyful news at hand. my bosom’s lord sits lightly in his throne; and all this day an unaccustom’d spirit lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts. i dreamt my lady came and found me dead,— strange dream, that gives a dead man leave to think!— and breath’d such life with kisses in my lips, that i reviv’d, and was an emperor. ah me, how sweet is love itself possess’d, when but love’s shadows are so rich in joy. enter balthasar. news from verona! how now, balthasar? dost thou not bring me letters from the friar? how doth my lady? is my father well? how fares my juliet? that i ask again; for nothing can be ill if she be well. balthasar. then she is well, and nothing can be ill. her body sleeps in capel’s monument, and her immortal part with angels lives. i saw her laid low in her kindred’s vault, and presently took post to tell it you. o pardon me for bringing these ill news, since you did leave it for my office, sir. romeo. is it even so? then i defy you, stars! thou know’st my lodging. get me ink and paper, and hire post-horses. i will hence tonight. balthasar. i do beseech you sir, have patience. your looks are pale and wild, and do import some misadventure. romeo. tush, thou art deceiv’d. leave me, and do the thing i bid thee do. hast thou no letters to me from the friar? balthasar. no, my good lord. romeo. no matter. get thee gone, and hire those horses. i’ll be with thee straight. [_exit balthasar._] well, juliet, i will lie with thee tonight. let’s see for means. o mischief thou art swift to enter in the thoughts of desperate men. i do remember an apothecary,— and hereabouts he dwells,—which late i noted in tatter’d weeds, with overwhelming brows, culling of simples, meagre were his looks, sharp misery had worn him to the bones; and in his needy shop a tortoise hung, an alligator stuff’d, and other skins of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves a beggarly account of empty boxes, green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds, remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses were thinly scatter’d, to make up a show. noting this penury, to myself i said, and if a man did need a poison now, whose sale is present death in mantua, here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him. o, this same thought did but forerun my need, and this same needy man must sell it me. as i remember, this should be the house. being holiday, the beggar’s shop is shut. what, ho! apothecary! enter apothecary. apothecary. who calls so loud? romeo. come hither, man. i see that thou art poor. hold, there is forty ducats. let me have a dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear as will disperse itself through all the veins, that the life-weary taker may fall dead, and that the trunk may be discharg’d of breath as violently as hasty powder fir’d doth hurry from the fatal cannon’s womb. apothecary. such mortal drugs i have, but mantua’s law is death to any he that utters them. romeo. art thou so bare and full of wretchedness, and fear’st to die? famine is in thy cheeks, need and oppression starveth in thine eyes, contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back. the world is not thy friend, nor the world’s law; the world affords no law to make thee rich; then be not poor, but break it and take this. apothecary. my poverty, but not my will consents. romeo. i pay thy poverty, and not thy will. apothecary. put this in any liquid thing you will and drink it off; and, if you had the strength of twenty men, it would despatch you straight. romeo. there is thy gold, worse poison to men’s souls, doing more murder in this loathsome world than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell. i sell thee poison, thou hast sold me none. farewell, buy food, and get thyself in flesh. come, cordial and not poison, go with me to juliet’s grave, for there must i use thee. [_exeunt._] scene ii. friar lawrence’s cell. enter friar john. friar john. holy franciscan friar! brother, ho! enter friar lawrence. friar lawrence. this same should be the voice of friar john. welcome from mantua. what says romeo? or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter. friar john. going to find a barefoot brother out, one of our order, to associate me, here in this city visiting the sick, and finding him, the searchers of the town, suspecting that we both were in a house where the infectious pestilence did reign, seal’d up the doors, and would not let us forth, so that my speed to mantua there was stay’d. friar lawrence. who bare my letter then to romeo? friar john. i could not send it,—here it is again,— nor get a messenger to bring it thee, so fearful were they of infection. friar lawrence. unhappy fortune! by my brotherhood, the letter was not nice, but full of charge, of dear import, and the neglecting it may do much danger. friar john, go hence, get me an iron crow and bring it straight unto my cell. friar john. brother, i’ll go and bring it thee. [_exit._] friar lawrence. now must i to the monument alone. within this three hours will fair juliet wake. she will beshrew me much that romeo hath had no notice of these accidents; but i will write again to mantua, and keep her at my cell till romeo come. poor living corse, clos’d in a dead man’s tomb. [_exit._] scene iii. a churchyard; in it a monument belonging to the capulets. enter paris, and his page bearing flowers and a torch. paris. give me thy torch, boy. hence and stand aloof. yet put it out, for i would not be seen. under yond yew tree lay thee all along, holding thy ear close to the hollow ground; so shall no foot upon the churchyard tread, being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves, but thou shalt hear it. whistle then to me, as signal that thou hear’st something approach. give me those flowers. do as i bid thee, go. page. [_aside._] i am almost afraid to stand alone here in the churchyard; yet i will adventure. [_retires._] paris. sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed i strew. o woe, thy canopy is dust and stones, which with sweet water nightly i will dew, or wanting that, with tears distill’d by moans. the obsequies that i for thee will keep, nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep. [_the page whistles._] the boy gives warning something doth approach. what cursed foot wanders this way tonight, to cross my obsequies and true love’s rite? what, with a torch! muffle me, night, awhile. [_retires._] enter romeo and balthasar with a torch, mattock, &c. romeo. give me that mattock and the wrenching iron. hold, take this letter; early in the morning see thou deliver it to my lord and father. give me the light; upon thy life i charge thee, whate’er thou hear’st or seest, stand all aloof and do not interrupt me in my course. why i descend into this bed of death is partly to behold my lady’s face, but chiefly to take thence from her dead finger a precious ring, a ring that i must use in dear employment. therefore hence, be gone. but if thou jealous dost return to pry in what i further shall intend to do, by heaven i will tear thee joint by joint, and strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs. the time and my intents are savage-wild; more fierce and more inexorable far than empty tigers or the roaring sea. balthasar. i will be gone, sir, and not trouble you. romeo. so shalt thou show me friendship. take thou that. live, and be prosperous, and farewell, good fellow. balthasar. for all this same, i’ll hide me hereabout. his looks i fear, and his intents i doubt. [_retires_] romeo. thou detestable maw, thou womb of death, gorg’d with the dearest morsel of the earth, thus i enforce thy rotten jaws to open, [_breaking open the door of the monument._] and in despite, i’ll cram thee with more food. paris. this is that banish’d haughty montague that murder’d my love’s cousin,—with which grief, it is supposed, the fair creature died,— and here is come to do some villainous shame to the dead bodies. i will apprehend him. [_advances._] stop thy unhallow’d toil, vile montague. can vengeance be pursu’d further than death? condemned villain, i do apprehend thee. obey, and go with me, for thou must die. romeo. i must indeed; and therefore came i hither. good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man. fly hence and leave me. think upon these gone; let them affright thee. i beseech thee, youth, put not another sin upon my head by urging me to fury. o be gone. by heaven i love thee better than myself; for i come hither arm’d against myself. stay not, be gone, live, and hereafter say, a madman’s mercy bid thee run away. paris. i do defy thy conjuration, and apprehend thee for a felon here. romeo. wilt thou provoke me? then have at thee, boy! [_they fight._] page. o lord, they fight! i will go call the watch. [_exit._] paris. o, i am slain! [_falls._] if thou be merciful, open the tomb, lay me with juliet. [_dies._] romeo. in faith, i will. let me peruse this face. mercutio’s kinsman, noble county paris! what said my man, when my betossed soul did not attend him as we rode? i think he told me paris should have married juliet. said he not so? or did i dream it so? or am i mad, hearing him talk of juliet, to think it was so? o, give me thy hand, one writ with me in sour misfortune’s book. i’ll bury thee in a triumphant grave. a grave? o no, a lantern, slaught’red youth, for here lies juliet, and her beauty makes this vault a feasting presence full of light. death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr’d. [_laying paris in the monument._] how oft when men are at the point of death have they been merry! which their keepers call a lightning before death. o, how may i call this a lightning? o my love, my wife, death that hath suck’d the honey of thy breath, hath had no power yet upon thy beauty. thou art not conquer’d. beauty’s ensign yet is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks, and death’s pale flag is not advanced there. tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet? o, what more favour can i do to thee than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain to sunder his that was thine enemy? forgive me, cousin. ah, dear juliet, why art thou yet so fair? shall i believe that unsubstantial death is amorous; and that the lean abhorred monster keeps thee here in dark to be his paramour? for fear of that i still will stay with thee, and never from this palace of dim night depart again. here, here will i remain with worms that are thy chambermaids. o, here will i set up my everlasting rest; and shake the yoke of inauspicious stars from this world-wearied flesh. eyes, look your last. arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, o you the doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss a dateless bargain to engrossing death. come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide. thou desperate pilot, now at once run on the dashing rocks thy sea-sick weary bark. here’s to my love! [_drinks._] o true apothecary! thy drugs are quick. thus with a kiss i die. [_dies._] enter, at the other end of the churchyard, friar lawrence, with a lantern, crow, and spade. friar lawrence. saint francis be my speed. how oft tonight have my old feet stumbled at graves? who’s there? who is it that consorts, so late, the dead? balthasar. here’s one, a friend, and one that knows you well. friar lawrence. bliss be upon you. tell me, good my friend, what torch is yond that vainly lends his light to grubs and eyeless skulls? as i discern, it burneth in the capels’ monument. balthasar. it doth so, holy sir, and there’s my master, one that you love. friar lawrence. who is it? balthasar. romeo. friar lawrence. how long hath he been there? balthasar. full half an hour. friar lawrence. go with me to the vault. balthasar. i dare not, sir; my master knows not but i am gone hence, and fearfully did menace me with death if i did stay to look on his intents. friar lawrence. stay then, i’ll go alone. fear comes upon me. o, much i fear some ill unlucky thing. balthasar. as i did sleep under this yew tree here, i dreamt my master and another fought, and that my master slew him. friar lawrence. romeo! [_advances._] alack, alack, what blood is this which stains the stony entrance of this sepulchre? what mean these masterless and gory swords to lie discolour’d by this place of peace? [_enters the monument._] romeo! o, pale! who else? what, paris too? and steep’d in blood? ah what an unkind hour is guilty of this lamentable chance? the lady stirs. [_juliet wakes and stirs._] juliet. o comfortable friar, where is my lord? i do remember well where i should be, and there i am. where is my romeo? [_noise within._] friar lawrence. i hear some noise. lady, come from that nest of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep. a greater power than we can contradict hath thwarted our intents. come, come away. thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead; and paris too. come, i’ll dispose of thee among a sisterhood of holy nuns. stay not to question, for the watch is coming. come, go, good juliet. i dare no longer stay. juliet. go, get thee hence, for i will not away. [_exit friar lawrence._] what’s here? a cup clos’d in my true love’s hand? poison, i see, hath been his timeless end. o churl. drink all, and left no friendly drop to help me after? i will kiss thy lips. haply some poison yet doth hang on them, to make me die with a restorative. [_kisses him._] thy lips are warm! first watch. [_within._] lead, boy. which way? juliet. yea, noise? then i’ll be brief. o happy dagger. [_snatching romeo’s dagger._] this is thy sheath. [_stabs herself_] there rest, and let me die. [_falls on romeo’s body and dies._] enter watch with the page of paris. page. this is the place. there, where the torch doth burn. first watch. the ground is bloody. search about the churchyard. go, some of you, whoe’er you find attach. [_exeunt some of the watch._] pitiful sight! here lies the county slain, and juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead, who here hath lain this two days buried. go tell the prince; run to the capulets. raise up the montagues, some others search. [_exeunt others of the watch._] we see the ground whereon these woes do lie, but the true ground of all these piteous woes we cannot without circumstance descry. re-enter some of the watch with balthasar. second watch. here’s romeo’s man. we found him in the churchyard. first watch. hold him in safety till the prince come hither. re-enter others of the watch with friar lawrence. third watch. here is a friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps. we took this mattock and this spade from him as he was coming from this churchyard side. first watch. a great suspicion. stay the friar too. enter the prince and attendants. prince. what misadventure is so early up, that calls our person from our morning’s rest? enter capulet, lady capulet and others. capulet. what should it be that they so shriek abroad? lady capulet. o the people in the street cry romeo, some juliet, and some paris, and all run with open outcry toward our monument. prince. what fear is this which startles in our ears? first watch. sovereign, here lies the county paris slain, and romeo dead, and juliet, dead before, warm and new kill’d. prince. search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes. first watch. here is a friar, and slaughter’d romeo’s man, with instruments upon them fit to open these dead men’s tombs. capulet. o heaven! o wife, look how our daughter bleeds! this dagger hath mista’en, for lo, his house is empty on the back of montague, and it mis-sheathed in my daughter’s bosom. lady capulet. o me! this sight of death is as a bell that warns my old age to a sepulchre. enter montague and others. prince. come, montague, for thou art early up, to see thy son and heir more early down. montague. alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight. grief of my son’s exile hath stopp’d her breath. what further woe conspires against mine age? prince. look, and thou shalt see. montague. o thou untaught! what manners is in this, to press before thy father to a grave? prince. seal up the mouth of outrage for a while, till we can clear these ambiguities, and know their spring, their head, their true descent, and then will i be general of your woes, and lead you even to death. meantime forbear, and let mischance be slave to patience. bring forth the parties of suspicion. friar lawrence. i am the greatest, able to do least, yet most suspected, as the time and place doth make against me, of this direful murder. and here i stand, both to impeach and purge myself condemned and myself excus’d. prince. then say at once what thou dost know in this. friar lawrence. i will be brief, for my short date of breath is not so long as is a tedious tale. romeo, there dead, was husband to that juliet, and she, there dead, that romeo’s faithful wife. i married them; and their stol’n marriage day was tybalt’s doomsday, whose untimely death banish’d the new-made bridegroom from this city; for whom, and not for tybalt, juliet pin’d. you, to remove that siege of grief from her, betroth’d, and would have married her perforce to county paris. then comes she to me, and with wild looks, bid me devise some means to rid her from this second marriage, or in my cell there would she kill herself. then gave i her, so tutored by my art, a sleeping potion, which so took effect as i intended, for it wrought on her the form of death. meantime i writ to romeo that he should hither come as this dire night to help to take her from her borrow’d grave, being the time the potion’s force should cease. but he which bore my letter, friar john, was stay’d by accident; and yesternight return’d my letter back. then all alone at the prefixed hour of her waking came i to take her from her kindred’s vault, meaning to keep her closely at my cell till i conveniently could send to romeo. but when i came, some minute ere the time of her awaking, here untimely lay the noble paris and true romeo dead. she wakes; and i entreated her come forth and bear this work of heaven with patience. but then a noise did scare me from the tomb; and she, too desperate, would not go with me, but, as it seems, did violence on herself. all this i know; and to the marriage her nurse is privy. and if ought in this miscarried by my fault, let my old life be sacrific’d, some hour before his time, unto the rigour of severest law. prince. we still have known thee for a holy man. where’s romeo’s man? what can he say to this? balthasar. i brought my master news of juliet’s death, and then in post he came from mantua to this same place, to this same monument. this letter he early bid me give his father, and threaten’d me with death, going in the vault, if i departed not, and left him there. prince. give me the letter, i will look on it. where is the county’s page that rais’d the watch? sirrah, what made your master in this place? page. he came with flowers to strew his lady’s grave, and bid me stand aloof, and so i did. anon comes one with light to ope the tomb, and by and by my master drew on him, and then i ran away to call the watch. prince. this letter doth make good the friar’s words, their course of love, the tidings of her death. and here he writes that he did buy a poison of a poor ’pothecary, and therewithal came to this vault to die, and lie with juliet. where be these enemies? capulet, montague, see what a scourge is laid upon your hate, that heaven finds means to kill your joys with love! and i, for winking at your discords too, have lost a brace of kinsmen. all are punish’d. capulet. o brother montague, give me thy hand. this is my daughter’s jointure, for no more can i demand. montague. but i can give thee more, for i will raise her statue in pure gold, that whiles verona by that name is known, there shall no figure at such rate be set as that of true and faithful juliet. capulet. as rich shall romeo’s by his lady’s lie, poor sacrifices of our enmity. prince. a glooming peace this morning with it brings; the sun for sorrow will not show his head. go hence, to have more talk of these sad things. some shall be pardon’d, and some punished, for never was a story of more woe than this of juliet and her romeo. [_exeunt._] *** end of the project gutenberg ebook romeo and juliet *** updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed. creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright law means that no one owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without permission and without paying copyright royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™ concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution. start: full license the full project gutenberg license please read this before you distribute or use this work to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license. section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™ electronic works 1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 1.b. “project gutenberg” is a registered trademark. it may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™ electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below. 1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the foundation” or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the united states and you are located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when you share it without charge with others. 1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the united states. 1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg: 1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear prominently whenever any copy of a project gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed: this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook. 1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “project gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™ license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™. 1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project gutenberg™ license. 1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a project gutenberg™ work in a format other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1. 1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works provided that: • you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation.” • you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™ license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™ works. • you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of receipt of the work. • you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of project gutenberg™ works. 1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 1.f. 1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment. 1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a project gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such damage. 1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem. 1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose. 1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions. 1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any defect you cause. section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™ project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life. volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org. section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws. the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the irs. the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate. while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate. international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff. please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses. donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate. section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone. for forty years, he produced and distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only a loose network of volunteer support. project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper edition. most people start at our website which has the main pg search facility: www.gutenberg.org. this website includes information about project gutenberg™, including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. ======book3====== the project gutenberg ebook of the king james version of the bible this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook. title: the king james version of the bible release date: august 1, 1989 [ebook #10] most recently updated: october 29, 2024 language: english *** start of the project gutenberg ebook the king james version of the bible *** the old testament of the king james version of the bible the first book of moses: called genesis the second book of moses: called exodus the third book of moses: called leviticus the fourth book of moses: called numbers the fifth book of moses: called deuteronomy the book of joshua the book of judges the book of ruth the first book of samuel the second book of samuel the first book of the kings the second book of the kings the first book of the chronicles the second book of the chronicles ezra the book of nehemiah the book of esther the book of job the book of psalms the proverbs ecclesiastes the song of solomon the book of the prophet isaiah the book of the prophet jeremiah the lamentations of jeremiah the book of the prophet ezekiel the book of daniel hosea joel amos obadiah jonah micah nahum habakkuk zephaniah haggai zechariah malachi the new testament of the king james bible the gospel according to saint matthew the gospel according to saint mark the gospel according to saint luke the gospel according to saint john the acts of the apostles the epistle of paul the apostle to the romans the first epistle of paul the apostle to the corinthians the second epistle of paul the apostle to the corinthians the epistle of paul the apostle to the galatians the epistle of paul the apostle to the ephesians the epistle of paul the apostle to the philippians the epistle of paul the apostle to the colossians the first epistle of paul the apostle to the thessalonians the second epistle of paul the apostle to the thessalonians the first epistle of paul the apostle to timothy the second epistle of paul the apostle to timothy the epistle of paul the apostle to titus the epistle of paul the apostle to philemon the epistle of paul the apostle to the hebrews the general epistle of james the first epistle general of peter the second general epistle of peter the first epistle general of john the second epistle general of john the third epistle general of john the general epistle of jude the revelation of saint john the divine the old testament of the king james version of the bible the first book of moses: called genesis 1:1 in the beginning god created the heaven and the earth. 1:2 and the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep. and the spirit of god moved upon the face of the waters. 1:3 and god said, let there be light: and there was light. 1:4 and god saw the light, that it was good: and god divided the light from the darkness. 1:5 and god called the light day, and the darkness he called night. and the evening and the morning were the first day. 1:6 and god said, let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters. 1:7 and god made the firmament, and divided the waters which were under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament: and it was so. 1:8 and god called the firmament heaven. and the evening and the morning were the second day. 1:9 and god said, let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry land appear: and it was so. 1:10 and god called the dry land earth; and the gathering together of the waters called he seas: and god saw that it was good. 1:11 and god said, let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in itself, upon the earth: and it was so. 1:12 and the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in itself, after his kind: and god saw that it was good. 1:13 and the evening and the morning were the third day. 1:14 and god said, let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years: 1:15 and let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth: and it was so. 1:16 and god made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the stars also. 1:17 and god set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth, 1:18 and to rule over the day and over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness: and god saw that it was good. 1:19 and the evening and the morning were the fourth day. 1:20 and god said, let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life, and fowl that may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven. 1:21 and god created great whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind: and god saw that it was good. 1:22 and god blessed them, saying, be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply in the earth. 1:23 and the evening and the morning were the fifth day. 1:24 and god said, let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of the earth after his kind: and it was so. 1:25 and god made the beast of the earth after his kind, and cattle after their kind, and every thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind: and god saw that it was good. 1:26 and god said, let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. 1:27 so god created man in his own image, in the image of god created he him; male and female created he them. 1:28 and god blessed them, and god said unto them, be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth. 1:29 and god said, behold, i have given you every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree, in the which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat. 1:30 and to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth, wherein there is life, i have given every green herb for meat: and it was so. 1:31 and god saw every thing that he had made, and, behold, it was very good. and the evening and the morning were the sixth day. 2:1 thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them. 2:2 and on the seventh day god ended his work which he had made; and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made. 2:3 and god blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that in it he had rested from all his work which god created and made. 2:4 these are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created, in the day that the lord god made the earth and the heavens, 2:5 and every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew: for the lord god had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was not a man to till the ground. 2:6 but there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground. 2:7 and the lord god formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul. 2:8 and the lord god planted a garden eastward in eden; and there he put the man whom he had formed. 2:9 and out of the ground made the lord god to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil. 2:10 and a river went out of eden to water the garden; and from thence it was parted, and became into four heads. 2:11 the name of the first is pison: that is it which compasseth the whole land of havilah, where there is gold; 2:12 and the gold of that land is good: there is bdellium and the onyx stone. 2:13 and the name of the second river is gihon: the same is it that compasseth the whole land of ethiopia. 2:14 and the name of the third river is hiddekel: that is it which goeth toward the east of assyria. and the fourth river is euphrates. 2:15 and the lord god took the man, and put him into the garden of eden to dress it and to keep it. 2:16 and the lord god commanded the man, saying, of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat: 2:17 but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die. 2:18 and the lord god said, it is not good that the man should be alone; i will make him an help meet for him. 2:19 and out of the ground the lord god formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air; and brought them unto adam to see what he would call them: and whatsoever adam called every living creature, that was the name thereof. 2:20 and adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast of the field; but for adam there was not found an help meet for him. 2:21 and the lord god caused a deep sleep to fall upon adam, and he slept: and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof; 2:22 and the rib, which the lord god had taken from man, made he a woman, and brought her unto the man. 2:23 and adam said, this is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called woman, because she was taken out of man. 2:24 therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh. 2:25 and they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed. 3:1 now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field which the lord god had made. and he said unto the woman, yea, hath god said, ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? 3:2 and the woman said unto the serpent, we may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden: 3:3 but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, god hath said, ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die. 3:4 and the serpent said unto the woman, ye shall not surely die: 3:5 for god doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil. 3:6 and when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her; and he did eat. 3:7 and the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked; and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons. 3:8 and they heard the voice of the lord god walking in the garden in the cool of the day: and adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the lord god amongst the trees of the garden. 3:9 and the lord god called unto adam, and said unto him, where art thou? 3:10 and he said, i heard thy voice in the garden, and i was afraid, because i was naked; and i hid myself. 3:11 and he said, who told thee that thou wast naked? hast thou eaten of the tree, whereof i commanded thee that thou shouldest not eat? 3:12 and the man said, the woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and i did eat. 3:13 and the lord god said unto the woman, what is this that thou hast done? and the woman said, the serpent beguiled me, and i did eat. 3:14 and the lord god said unto the serpent, because thou hast done this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life: 3:15 and i will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel. 3:16 unto the woman he said, i will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children; and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee. 3:17 and unto adam he said, because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of which i commanded thee, saying, thou shalt not eat of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life; 3:18 thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field; 3:19 in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return. 3:20 and adam called his wife’s name eve; because she was the mother of all living. 3:21 unto adam also and to his wife did the lord god make coats of skins, and clothed them. 3:22 and the lord god said, behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever: 3:23 therefore the lord god sent him forth from the garden of eden, to till the ground from whence he was taken. 3:24 so he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the garden of eden cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life. 4:1 and adam knew eve his wife; and she conceived, and bare cain, and said, i have gotten a man from the lord. 4:2 and she again bare his brother abel. and abel was a keeper of sheep, but cain was a tiller of the ground. 4:3 and in process of time it came to pass, that cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the lord. 4:4 and abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock and of the fat thereof. and the lord had respect unto abel and to his offering: 4:5 but unto cain and to his offering he had not respect. and cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell. 4:6 and the lord said unto cain, why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance fallen? 4:7 if thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door. and unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him. 4:8 and cain talked with abel his brother: and it came to pass, when they were in the field, that cain rose up against abel his brother, and slew him. 4:9 and the lord said unto cain, where is abel thy brother? and he said, i know not: am i my brother’s keeper? 4:10 and he said, what hast thou done? the voice of thy brother’s blood crieth unto me from the ground. 4:11 and now art thou cursed from the earth, which hath opened her mouth to receive thy brother’s blood from thy hand; 4:12 when thou tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength; a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth. 4:13 and cain said unto the lord, my punishment is greater than i can bear. 4:14 behold, thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the earth; and from thy face shall i be hid; and i shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth; and it shall come to pass, that every one that findeth me shall slay me. 4:15 and the lord said unto him, therefore whosoever slayeth cain, vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold. and the lord set a mark upon cain, lest any finding him should kill him. 4:16 and cain went out from the presence of the lord, and dwelt in the land of nod, on the east of eden. 4:17 and cain knew his wife; and she conceived, and bare enoch: and he builded a city, and called the name of the city, after the name of his son, enoch. 4:18 and unto enoch was born irad: and irad begat mehujael: and mehujael begat methusael: and methusael begat lamech. 4:19 and lamech took unto him two wives: the name of the one was adah, and the name of the other zillah. 4:20 and adah bare jabal: he was the father of such as dwell in tents, and of such as have cattle. 4:21 and his brother’s name was jubal: he was the father of all such as handle the harp and organ. 4:22 and zillah, she also bare tubalcain, an instructer of every artificer in brass and iron: and the sister of tubalcain was naamah. 4:23 and lamech said unto his wives, adah and zillah, hear my voice; ye wives of lamech, hearken unto my speech: for i have slain a man to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt. 4:24 if cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly lamech seventy and sevenfold. 4:25 and adam knew his wife again; and she bare a son, and called his name seth: for god, said she, hath appointed me another seed instead of abel, whom cain slew. 4:26 and to seth, to him also there was born a son; and he called his name enos: then began men to call upon the name of the lord. 5:1 this is the book of the generations of adam. in the day that god created man, in the likeness of god made he him; 5:2 male and female created he them; and blessed them, and called their name adam, in the day when they were created. 5:3 and adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat a son in his own likeness, and after his image; and called his name seth: 5:4 and the days of adam after he had begotten seth were eight hundred years: and he begat sons and daughters: 5:5 and all the days that adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years: and he died. 5:6 and seth lived an hundred and five years, and begat enos: 5:7 and seth lived after he begat enos eight hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters: 5:8 and all the days of seth were nine hundred and twelve years: and he died. 5:9 and enos lived ninety years, and begat cainan: 5:10 and enos lived after he begat cainan eight hundred and fifteen years, and begat sons and daughters: 5:11 and all the days of enos were nine hundred and five years: and he died. 5:12 and cainan lived seventy years and begat mahalaleel: 5:13 and cainan lived after he begat mahalaleel eight hundred and forty years, and begat sons and daughters: 5:14 and all the days of cainan were nine hundred and ten years: and he died. 5:15 and mahalaleel lived sixty and five years, and begat jared: 5:16 and mahalaleel lived after he begat jared eight hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters: 5:17 and all the days of mahalaleel were eight hundred ninety and five years: and he died. 5:18 and jared lived an hundred sixty and two years, and he begat enoch: 5:19 and jared lived after he begat enoch eight hundred years, and begat sons and daughters: 5:20 and all the days of jared were nine hundred sixty and two years: and he died. 5:21 and enoch lived sixty and five years, and begat methuselah: 5:22 and enoch walked with god after he begat methuselah three hundred years, and begat sons and daughters: 5:23 and all the days of enoch were three hundred sixty and five years: 5:24 and enoch walked with god: and he was not; for god took him. 5:25 and methuselah lived an hundred eighty and seven years, and begat lamech. 5:26 and methuselah lived after he begat lamech seven hundred eighty and two years, and begat sons and daughters: 5:27 and all the days of methuselah were nine hundred sixty and nine years: and he died. 5:28 and lamech lived an hundred eighty and two years, and begat a son: 5:29 and he called his name noah, saying, this same shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the lord hath cursed. 5:30 and lamech lived after he begat noah five hundred ninety and five years, and begat sons and daughters: 5:31 and all the days of lamech were seven hundred seventy and seven years: and he died. 5:32 and noah was five hundred years old: and noah begat shem, ham, and japheth. 6:1 and it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of the earth, and daughters were born unto them, 6:2 that the sons of god saw the daughters of men that they were fair; and they took them wives of all which they chose. 6:3 and the lord said, my spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he also is flesh: yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years. 6:4 there were giants in the earth in those days; and also after that, when the sons of god came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare children to them, the same became mighty men which were of old, men of renown. 6:5 and god saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. 6:6 and it repented the lord that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart. 6:7 and the lord said, i will destroy man whom i have created from the face of the earth; both man, and beast, and the creeping thing, and the fowls of the air; for it repenteth me that i have made them. 6:8 but noah found grace in the eyes of the lord. 6:9 these are the generations of noah: noah was a just man and perfect in his generations, and noah walked with god. 6:10 and noah begat three sons, shem, ham, and japheth. 6:11 the earth also was corrupt before god, and the earth was filled with violence. 6:12 and god looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth. 6:13 and god said unto noah, the end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled with violence through them; and, behold, i will destroy them with the earth. 6:14 make thee an ark of gopher wood; rooms shalt thou make in the ark, and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch. 6:15 and this is the fashion which thou shalt make it of: the length of the ark shall be three hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits. 6:16 a window shalt thou make to the ark, and in a cubit shalt thou finish it above; and the door of the ark shalt thou set in the side thereof; with lower, second, and third stories shalt thou make it. 6:17 and, behold, i, even i, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth, to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of life, from under heaven; and every thing that is in the earth shall die. 6:18 but with thee will i establish my covenant; and thou shalt come into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons’ wives with thee. 6:19 and of every living thing of all flesh, two of every sort shalt thou bring into the ark, to keep them alive with thee; they shall be male and female. 6:20 of fowls after their kind, and of cattle after their kind, of every creeping thing of the earth after his kind, two of every sort shall come unto thee, to keep them alive. 6:21 and take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten, and thou shalt gather it to thee; and it shall be for food for thee, and for them. 6:22 thus did noah; according to all that god commanded him, so did he. 7:1 and the lord said unto noah, come thou and all thy house into the ark; for thee have i seen righteous before me in this generation. 7:2 of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens, the male and his female: and of beasts that are not clean by two, the male and his female. 7:3 of fowls also of the air by sevens, the male and the female; to keep seed alive upon the face of all the earth. 7:4 for yet seven days, and i will cause it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights; and every living substance that i have made will i destroy from off the face of the earth. 7:5 and noah did according unto all that the lord commanded him. 7:6 and noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters was upon the earth. 7:7 and noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons’ wives with him, into the ark, because of the waters of the flood. 7:8 of clean beasts, and of beasts that are not clean, and of fowls, and of every thing that creepeth upon the earth, 7:9 there went in two and two unto noah into the ark, the male and the female, as god had commanded noah. 7:10 and it came to pass after seven days, that the waters of the flood were upon the earth. 7:11 in the six hundredth year of noah’s life, in the second month, the seventeenth day of the month, the same day were all the fountains of the great deep broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened. 7:12 and the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights. 7:13 in the selfsame day entered noah, and shem, and ham, and japheth, the sons of noah, and noah’s wife, and the three wives of his sons with them, into the ark; 7:14 they, and every beast after his kind, and all the cattle after their kind, and every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind, and every fowl after his kind, every bird of every sort. 7:15 and they went in unto noah into the ark, two and two of all flesh, wherein is the breath of life. 7:16 and they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as god had commanded him: and the lord shut him in. 7:17 and the flood was forty days upon the earth; and the waters increased, and bare up the ark, and it was lift up above the earth. 7:18 and the waters prevailed, and were increased greatly upon the earth; and the ark went upon the face of the waters. 7:19 and the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth; and all the high hills, that were under the whole heaven, were covered. 7:20 fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail; and the mountains were covered. 7:21 and all flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of beast, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, and every man: 7:22 all in whose nostrils was the breath of life, of all that was in the dry land, died. 7:23 and every living substance was destroyed which was upon the face of the ground, both man, and cattle, and the creeping things, and the fowl of the heaven; and they were destroyed from the earth: and noah only remained alive, and they that were with him in the ark. 7:24 and the waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty days. 8:1 and god remembered noah, and every living thing, and all the cattle that was with him in the ark: and god made a wind to pass over the earth, and the waters asswaged; 8:2 the fountains also of the deep and the windows of heaven were stopped, and the rain from heaven was restrained; 8:3 and the waters returned from off the earth continually: and after the end of the hundred and fifty days the waters were abated. 8:4 and the ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the month, upon the mountains of ararat. 8:5 and the waters decreased continually until the tenth month: in the tenth month, on the first day of the month, were the tops of the mountains seen. 8:6 and it came to pass at the end of forty days, that noah opened the window of the ark which he had made: 8:7 and he sent forth a raven, which went forth to and fro, until the waters were dried up from off the earth. 8:8 also he sent forth a dove from him, to see if the waters were abated from off the face of the ground; 8:9 but the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot, and she returned unto him into the ark, for the waters were on the face of the whole earth: then he put forth his hand, and took her, and pulled her in unto him into the ark. 8:10 and he stayed yet other seven days; and again he sent forth the dove out of the ark; 8:11 and the dove came in to him in the evening; and, lo, in her mouth was an olive leaf pluckt off: so noah knew that the waters were abated from off the earth. 8:12 and he stayed yet other seven days; and sent forth the dove; which returned not again unto him any more. 8:13 and it came to pass in the six hundredth and first year, in the first month, the first day of the month, the waters were dried up from off the earth: and noah removed the covering of the ark, and looked, and, behold, the face of the ground was dry. 8:14 and in the second month, on the seven and twentieth day of the month, was the earth dried. 8:15 and god spake unto noah, saying, 8:16 go forth of the ark, thou, and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy sons’ wives with thee. 8:17 bring forth with thee every living thing that is with thee, of all flesh, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth; that they may breed abundantly in the earth, and be fruitful, and multiply upon the earth. 8:18 and noah went forth, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons’ wives with him: 8:19 every beast, every creeping thing, and every fowl, and whatsoever creepeth upon the earth, after their kinds, went forth out of the ark. 8:20 and noah builded an altar unto the lord; and took of every clean beast, and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt offerings on the altar. 8:21 and the lord smelled a sweet savour; and the lord said in his heart, i will not again curse the ground any more for man’s sake; for the imagination of man’s heart is evil from his youth; neither will i again smite any more every thing living, as i have done. 8:22 while the earth remaineth, seedtime and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease. 9:1 and god blessed noah and his sons, and said unto them, be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth. 9:2 and the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea; into your hand are they delivered. 9:3 every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the green herb have i given you all things. 9:4 but flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall ye not eat. 9:5 and surely your blood of your lives will i require; at the hand of every beast will i require it, and at the hand of man; at the hand of every man’s brother will i require the life of man. 9:6 whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of god made he man. 9:7 and you, be ye fruitful, and multiply; bring forth abundantly in the earth, and multiply therein. 9:8 and god spake unto noah, and to his sons with him, saying, 9:9 and i, behold, i establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after you; 9:10 and with every living creature that is with you, of the fowl, of the cattle, and of every beast of the earth with you; from all that go out of the ark, to every beast of the earth. 9:11 and i will establish my covenant with you, neither shall all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood; neither shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth. 9:12 and god said, this is the token of the covenant which i make between me and you and every living creature that is with you, for perpetual generations: 9:13 i do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of a covenant between me and the earth. 9:14 and it shall come to pass, when i bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be seen in the cloud: 9:15 and i will remember my covenant, which is between me and you and every living creature of all flesh; and the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh. 9:16 and the bow shall be in the cloud; and i will look upon it, that i may remember the everlasting covenant between god and every living creature of all flesh that is upon the earth. 9:17 and god said unto noah, this is the token of the covenant, which i have established between me and all flesh that is upon the earth. 9:18 and the sons of noah, that went forth of the ark, were shem, and ham, and japheth: and ham is the father of canaan. 9:19 these are the three sons of noah: and of them was the whole earth overspread. 9:20 and noah began to be an husbandman, and he planted a vineyard: 9:21 and he drank of the wine, and was drunken; and he was uncovered within his tent. 9:22 and ham, the father of canaan, saw the nakedness of his father, and told his two brethren without. 9:23 and shem and japheth took a garment, and laid it upon both their shoulders, and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their father; and their faces were backward, and they saw not their father’s nakedness. 9:24 and noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son had done unto him. 9:25 and he said, cursed be canaan; a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren. 9:26 and he said, blessed be the lord god of shem; and canaan shall be his servant. 9:27 god shall enlarge japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of shem; and canaan shall be his servant. 9:28 and noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years. 9:29 and all the days of noah were nine hundred and fifty years: and he died. 10:1 now these are the generations of the sons of noah, shem, ham, and japheth: and unto them were sons born after the flood. 10:2 the sons of japheth; gomer, and magog, and madai, and javan, and tubal, and meshech, and tiras. 10:3 and the sons of gomer; ashkenaz, and riphath, and togarmah. 10:4 and the sons of javan; elishah, and tarshish, kittim, and dodanim. 10:5 by these were the isles of the gentiles divided in their lands; every one after his tongue, after their families, in their nations. 10:6 and the sons of ham; cush, and mizraim, and phut, and canaan. 10:7 and the sons of cush; seba, and havilah, and sabtah, and raamah, and sabtechah: and the sons of raamah; sheba, and dedan. 10:8 and cush begat nimrod: he began to be a mighty one in the earth. 10:9 he was a mighty hunter before the lord: wherefore it is said, even as nimrod the mighty hunter before the lord. 10:10 and the beginning of his kingdom was babel, and erech, and accad, and calneh, in the land of shinar. 10:11 out of that land went forth asshur, and builded nineveh, and the city rehoboth, and calah, 10:12 and resen between nineveh and calah: the same is a great city. 10:13 and mizraim begat ludim, and anamim, and lehabim, and naphtuhim, 10:14 and pathrusim, and casluhim, (out of whom came philistim,) and caphtorim. 10:15 and canaan begat sidon his first born, and heth, 10:16 and the jebusite, and the amorite, and the girgasite, 10:17 and the hivite, and the arkite, and the sinite, 10:18 and the arvadite, and the zemarite, and the hamathite: and afterward were the families of the canaanites spread abroad. 10:19 and the border of the canaanites was from sidon, as thou comest to gerar, unto gaza; as thou goest, unto sodom, and gomorrah, and admah, and zeboim, even unto lasha. 10:20 these are the sons of ham, after their families, after their tongues, in their countries, and in their nations. 10:21 unto shem also, the father of all the children of eber, the brother of japheth the elder, even to him were children born. 10:22 the children of shem; elam, and asshur, and arphaxad, and lud, and aram. 10:23 and the children of aram; uz, and hul, and gether, and mash. 10:24 and arphaxad begat salah; and salah begat eber. 10:25 and unto eber were born two sons: the name of one was peleg; for in his days was the earth divided; and his brother’s name was joktan. 10:26 and joktan begat almodad, and sheleph, and hazarmaveth, and jerah, 10:27 and hadoram, and uzal, and diklah, 10:28 and obal, and abimael, and sheba, 10:29 and ophir, and havilah, and jobab: all these were the sons of joktan. 10:30 and their dwelling was from mesha, as thou goest unto sephar a mount of the east. 10:31 these are the sons of shem, after their families, after their tongues, in their lands, after their nations. 10:32 these are the families of the sons of noah, after their generations, in their nations: and by these were the nations divided in the earth after the flood. 11:1 and the whole earth was of one language, and of one speech. 11:2 and it came to pass, as they journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the land of shinar; and they dwelt there. 11:3 and they said one to another, go to, let us make brick, and burn them thoroughly. and they had brick for stone, and slime had they for morter. 11:4 and they said, go to, let us build us a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth. 11:5 and the lord came down to see the city and the tower, which the children of men builded. 11:6 and the lord said, behold, the people is one, and they have all one language; and this they begin to do: and now nothing will be restrained from them, which they have imagined to do. 11:7 go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that they may not understand one another’s speech. 11:8 so the lord scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth: and they left off to build the city. 11:9 therefore is the name of it called babel; because the lord did there confound the language of all the earth: and from thence did the lord scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth. 11:10 these are the generations of shem: shem was an hundred years old, and begat arphaxad two years after the flood: 11:11 and shem lived after he begat arphaxad five hundred years, and begat sons and daughters. 11:12 and arphaxad lived five and thirty years, and begat salah: 11:13 and arphaxad lived after he begat salah four hundred and three years, and begat sons and daughters. 11:14 and salah lived thirty years, and begat eber: 11:15 and salah lived after he begat eber four hundred and three years, and begat sons and daughters. 11:16 and eber lived four and thirty years, and begat peleg: 11:17 and eber lived after he begat peleg four hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters. 11:18 and peleg lived thirty years, and begat reu: 11:19 and peleg lived after he begat reu two hundred and nine years, and begat sons and daughters. 11:20 and reu lived two and thirty years, and begat serug: 11:21 and reu lived after he begat serug two hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters. 11:22 and serug lived thirty years, and begat nahor: 11:23 and serug lived after he begat nahor two hundred years, and begat sons and daughters. 11:24 and nahor lived nine and twenty years, and begat terah: 11:25 and nahor lived after he begat terah an hundred and nineteen years, and begat sons and daughters. 11:26 and terah lived seventy years, and begat abram, nahor, and haran. 11:27 now these are the generations of terah: terah begat abram, nahor, and haran; and haran begat lot. 11:28 and haran died before his father terah in the land of his nativity, in ur of the chaldees. 11:29 and abram and nahor took them wives: the name of abram’s wife was sarai; and the name of nahor’s wife, milcah, the daughter of haran, the father of milcah, and the father of iscah. 11:30 but sarai was barren; she had no child. 11:31 and terah took abram his son, and lot the son of haran his son’s son, and sarai his daughter in law, his son abram’s wife; and they went forth with them from ur of the chaldees, to go into the land of canaan; and they came unto haran, and dwelt there. 11:32 and the days of terah were two hundred and five years: and terah died in haran. 12:1 now the lord had said unto abram, get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father’s house, unto a land that i will shew thee: 12:2 and i will make of thee a great nation, and i will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing: 12:3 and i will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee: and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed. 12:4 so abram departed, as the lord had spoken unto him; and lot went with him: and abram was seventy and five years old when he departed out of haran. 12:5 and abram took sarai his wife, and lot his brother’s son, and all their substance that they had gathered, and the souls that they had gotten in haran; and they went forth to go into the land of canaan; and into the land of canaan they came. 12:6 and abram passed through the land unto the place of sichem, unto the plain of moreh. and the canaanite was then in the land. 12:7 and the lord appeared unto abram, and said, unto thy seed will i give this land: and there builded he an altar unto the lord, who appeared unto him. 12:8 and he removed from thence unto a mountain on the east of bethel, and pitched his tent, having bethel on the west, and hai on the east: and there he builded an altar unto the lord, and called upon the name of the lord. 12:9 and abram journeyed, going on still toward the south. 12:10 and there was a famine in the land: and abram went down into egypt to sojourn there; for the famine was grievous in the land. 12:11 and it came to pass, when he was come near to enter into egypt, that he said unto sarai his wife, behold now, i know that thou art a fair woman to look upon: 12:12 therefore it shall come to pass, when the egyptians shall see thee, that they shall say, this is his wife: and they will kill me, but they will save thee alive. 12:13 say, i pray thee, thou art my sister: that it may be well with me for thy sake; and my soul shall live because of thee. 12:14 and it came to pass, that, when abram was come into egypt, the egyptians beheld the woman that she was very fair. 12:15 the princes also of pharaoh saw her, and commended her before pharaoh: and the woman was taken into pharaoh’s house. 12:16 and he entreated abram well for her sake: and he had sheep, and oxen, and he asses, and menservants, and maidservants, and she asses, and camels. 12:17 and the lord plagued pharaoh and his house with great plagues because of sarai abram’s wife. 12:18 and pharaoh called abram and said, what is this that thou hast done unto me? why didst thou not tell me that she was thy wife? 12:19 why saidst thou, she is my sister? so i might have taken her to me to wife: now therefore behold thy wife, take her, and go thy way. 12:20 and pharaoh commanded his men concerning him: and they sent him away, and his wife, and all that he had. 13:1 and abram went up out of egypt, he, and his wife, and all that he had, and lot with him, into the south. 13:2 and abram was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold. 13:3 and he went on his journeys from the south even to bethel, unto the place where his tent had been at the beginning, between bethel and hai; 13:4 unto the place of the altar, which he had made there at the first: and there abram called on the name of the lord. 13:5 and lot also, which went with abram, had flocks, and herds, and tents. 13:6 and the land was not able to bear them, that they might dwell together: for their substance was great, so that they could not dwell together. 13:7 and there was a strife between the herdmen of abram’s cattle and the herdmen of lot’s cattle: and the canaanite and the perizzite dwelled then in the land. 13:8 and abram said unto lot, let there be no strife, i pray thee, between me and thee, and between my herdmen and thy herdmen; for we be brethren. 13:9 is not the whole land before thee? separate thyself, i pray thee, from me: if thou wilt take the left hand, then i will go to the right; or if thou depart to the right hand, then i will go to the left. 13:10 and lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain of jordan, that it was well watered every where, before the lord destroyed sodom and gomorrah, even as the garden of the lord, like the land of egypt, as thou comest unto zoar. 13:11 then lot chose him all the plain of jordan; and lot journeyed east: and they separated themselves the one from the other. 13:12 abram dwelled in the land of canaan, and lot dwelled in the cities of the plain, and pitched his tent toward sodom. 13:13 but the men of sodom were wicked and sinners before the lord exceedingly. 13:14 and the lord said unto abram, after that lot was separated from him, lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward: 13:15 for all the land which thou seest, to thee will i give it, and to thy seed for ever. 13:16 and i will make thy seed as the dust of the earth: so that if a man can number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also be numbered. 13:17 arise, walk through the land in the length of it and in the breadth of it; for i will give it unto thee. 13:18 then abram removed his tent, and came and dwelt in the plain of mamre, which is in hebron, and built there an altar unto the lord. 14:1 and it came to pass in the days of amraphel king of shinar, arioch king of ellasar, chedorlaomer king of elam, and tidal king of nations; 14:2 that these made war with bera king of sodom, and with birsha king of gomorrah, shinab king of admah, and shemeber king of zeboiim, and the king of bela, which is zoar. 14:3 all these were joined together in the vale of siddim, which is the salt sea. 14:4 twelve years they served chedorlaomer, and in the thirteenth year they rebelled. 14:5 and in the fourteenth year came chedorlaomer, and the kings that were with him, and smote the rephaims in ashteroth karnaim, and the zuzims in ham, and the emins in shaveh kiriathaim, 14:6 and the horites in their mount seir, unto elparan, which is by the wilderness. 14:7 and they returned, and came to enmishpat, which is kadesh, and smote all the country of the amalekites, and also the amorites, that dwelt in hazezontamar. 14:8 and there went out the king of sodom, and the king of gomorrah, and the king of admah, and the king of zeboiim, and the king of bela (the same is zoar;) and they joined battle with them in the vale of siddim; 14:9 with chedorlaomer the king of elam, and with tidal king of nations, and amraphel king of shinar, and arioch king of ellasar; four kings with five. 14:10 and the vale of siddim was full of slimepits; and the kings of sodom and gomorrah fled, and fell there; and they that remained fled to the mountain. 14:11 and they took all the goods of sodom and gomorrah, and all their victuals, and went their way. 14:12 and they took lot, abram’s brother’s son, who dwelt in sodom, and his goods, and departed. 14:13 and there came one that had escaped, and told abram the hebrew; for he dwelt in the plain of mamre the amorite, brother of eshcol, and brother of aner: and these were confederate with abram. 14:14 and when abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he armed his trained servants, born in his own house, three hundred and eighteen, and pursued them unto dan. 14:15 and he divided himself against them, he and his servants, by night, and smote them, and pursued them unto hobah, which is on the left hand of damascus. 14:16 and he brought back all the goods, and also brought again his brother lot, and his goods, and the women also, and the people. 14:17 and the king of sodom went out to meet him after his return from the slaughter of chedorlaomer, and of the kings that were with him, at the valley of shaveh, which is the king’s dale. 14:18 and melchizedek king of salem brought forth bread and wine: and he was the priest of the most high god. 14:19 and he blessed him, and said, blessed be abram of the most high god, possessor of heaven and earth: 14:20 and blessed be the most high god, which hath delivered thine enemies into thy hand. and he gave him tithes of all. 14:21 and the king of sodom said unto abram, give me the persons, and take the goods to thyself. 14:22 and abram said to the king of sodom, i have lift up mine hand unto the lord, the most high god, the possessor of heaven and earth, 14:23 that i will not take from a thread even to a shoelatchet, and that i will not take any thing that is thine, lest thou shouldest say, i have made abram rich: 14:24 save only that which the young men have eaten, and the portion of the men which went with me, aner, eshcol, and mamre; let them take their portion. 15:1 after these things the word of the lord came unto abram in a vision, saying, fear not, abram: i am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward. 15:2 and abram said, lord god, what wilt thou give me, seeing i go childless, and the steward of my house is this eliezer of damascus? 15:3 and abram said, behold, to me thou hast given no seed: and, lo, one born in my house is mine heir. 15:4 and, behold, the word of the lord came unto him, saying, this shall not be thine heir; but he that shall come forth out of thine own bowels shall be thine heir. 15:5 and he brought him forth abroad, and said, look now toward heaven, and tell the stars, if thou be able to number them: and he said unto him, so shall thy seed be. 15:6 and he believed in the lord; and he counted it to him for righteousness. 15:7 and he said unto him, i am the lord that brought thee out of ur of the chaldees, to give thee this land to inherit it. 15:8 and he said, lord god, whereby shall i know that i shall inherit it? 15:9 and he said unto him, take me an heifer of three years old, and a she goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a turtledove, and a young pigeon. 15:10 and he took unto him all these, and divided them in the midst, and laid each piece one against another: but the birds divided he not. 15:11 and when the fowls came down upon the carcases, abram drove them away. 15:12 and when the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon abram; and, lo, an horror of great darkness fell upon him. 15:13 and he said unto abram, know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years; 15:14 and also that nation, whom they shall serve, will i judge: and afterward shall they come out with great substance. 15:15 and thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace; thou shalt be buried in a good old age. 15:16 but in the fourth generation they shall come hither again: for the iniquity of the amorites is not yet full. 15:17 and it came to pass, that, when the sun went down, and it was dark, behold a smoking furnace, and a burning lamp that passed between those pieces. 15:18 in the same day the lord made a covenant with abram, saying, unto thy seed have i given this land, from the river of egypt unto the great river, the river euphrates: 15:19 the kenites, and the kenizzites, and the kadmonites, 15:20 and the hittites, and the perizzites, and the rephaims, 15:21 and the amorites, and the canaanites, and the girgashites, and the jebusites. 16:1 now sarai abram’s wife bare him no children: and she had an handmaid, an egyptian, whose name was hagar. 16:2 and sarai said unto abram, behold now, the lord hath restrained me from bearing: i pray thee, go in unto my maid; it may be that i may obtain children by her. and abram hearkened to the voice of sarai. 16:3 and sarai abram’s wife took hagar her maid the egyptian, after abram had dwelt ten years in the land of canaan, and gave her to her husband abram to be his wife. 16:4 and he went in unto hagar, and she conceived: and when she saw that she had conceived, her mistress was despised in her eyes. 16:5 and sarai said unto abram, my wrong be upon thee: i have given my maid into thy bosom; and when she saw that she had conceived, i was despised in her eyes: the lord judge between me and thee. 16:6 but abram said unto sarai, behold, thy maid is in thine hand; do to her as it pleaseth thee. and when sarai dealt hardly with her, she fled from her face. 16:7 and the angel of the lord found her by a fountain of water in the wilderness, by the fountain in the way to shur. 16:8 and he said, hagar, sarai’s maid, whence camest thou? and whither wilt thou go? and she said, i flee from the face of my mistress sarai. 16:9 and the angel of the lord said unto her, return to thy mistress, and submit thyself under her hands. 16:10 and the angel of the lord said unto her, i will multiply thy seed exceedingly, that it shall not be numbered for multitude. 16:11 and the angel of the lord said unto her, behold, thou art with child and shalt bear a son, and shalt call his name ishmael; because the lord hath heard thy affliction. 16:12 and he will be a wild man; his hand will be against every man, and every man’s hand against him; and he shall dwell in the presence of all his brethren. 16:13 and she called the name of the lord that spake unto her, thou god seest me: for she said, have i also here looked after him that seeth me? 16:14 wherefore the well was called beerlahairoi; behold, it is between kadesh and bered. 16:15 and hagar bare abram a son: and abram called his son’s name, which hagar bare, ishmael. 16:16 and abram was fourscore and six years old, when hagar bare ishmael to abram. 17:1 and when abram was ninety years old and nine, the lord appeared to abram, and said unto him, i am the almighty god; walk before me, and be thou perfect. 17:2 and i will make my covenant between me and thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly. 17:3 and abram fell on his face: and god talked with him, saying, 17:4 as for me, behold, my covenant is with thee, and thou shalt be a father of many nations. 17:5 neither shall thy name any more be called abram, but thy name shall be abraham; for a father of many nations have i made thee. 17:6 and i will make thee exceeding fruitful, and i will make nations of thee, and kings shall come out of thee. 17:7 and i will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a god unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. 17:8 and i will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of canaan, for an everlasting possession; and i will be their god. 17:9 and god said unto abraham, thou shalt keep my covenant therefore, thou, and thy seed after thee in their generations. 17:10 this is my covenant, which ye shall keep, between me and you and thy seed after thee; every man child among you shall be circumcised. 17:11 and ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you. 17:12 and he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every man child in your generations, he that is born in the house, or bought with money of any stranger, which is not of thy seed. 17:13 he that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy money, must needs be circumcised: and my covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting covenant. 17:14 and the uncircumcised man child whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people; he hath broken my covenant. 17:15 and god said unto abraham, as for sarai thy wife, thou shalt not call her name sarai, but sarah shall her name be. 17:16 and i will bless her, and give thee a son also of her: yea, i will bless her, and she shall be a mother of nations; kings of people shall be of her. 17:17 then abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, and said in his heart, shall a child be born unto him that is an hundred years old? and shall sarah, that is ninety years old, bear? 17:18 and abraham said unto god, o that ishmael might live before thee! 17:19 and god said, sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou shalt call his name isaac: and i will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him. 17:20 and as for ishmael, i have heard thee: behold, i have blessed him, and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly; twelve princes shall he beget, and i will make him a great nation. 17:21 but my covenant will i establish with isaac, which sarah shall bear unto thee at this set time in the next year. 17:22 and he left off talking with him, and god went up from abraham. 17:23 and abraham took ishmael his son, and all that were born in his house, and all that were bought with his money, every male among the men of abraham’s house; and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in the selfsame day, as god had said unto him. 17:24 and abraham was ninety years old and nine, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin. 17:25 and ishmael his son was thirteen years old, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin. 17:26 in the selfsame day was abraham circumcised, and ishmael his son. 17:27 and all the men of his house, born in the house, and bought with money of the stranger, were circumcised with him. 18:1 and the lord appeared unto him in the plains of mamre: and he sat in the tent door in the heat of the day; 18:2 and he lift up his eyes and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him: and when he saw them, he ran to meet them from the tent door, and bowed himself toward the ground, 18:3 and said, my lord, if now i have found favour in thy sight, pass not away, i pray thee, from thy servant: 18:4 let a little water, i pray you, be fetched, and wash your feet, and rest yourselves under the tree: 18:5 and i will fetch a morsel of bread, and comfort ye your hearts; after that ye shall pass on: for therefore are ye come to your servant. and they said, so do, as thou hast said. 18:6 and abraham hastened into the tent unto sarah, and said, make ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes upon the hearth. 18:7 and abraham ran unto the herd, and fetcht a calf tender and good, and gave it unto a young man; and he hasted to dress it. 18:8 and he took butter, and milk, and the calf which he had dressed, and set it before them; and he stood by them under the tree, and they did eat. 18:9 and they said unto him, where is sarah thy wife? and he said, behold, in the tent. 18:10 and he said, i will certainly return unto thee according to the time of life; and, lo, sarah thy wife shall have a son. and sarah heard it in the tent door, which was behind him. 18:11 now abraham and sarah were old and well stricken in age; and it ceased to be with sarah after the manner of women. 18:12 therefore sarah laughed within herself, saying, after i am waxed old shall i have pleasure, my lord being old also? 18:13 and the lord said unto abraham, wherefore did sarah laugh, saying, shall i of a surety bear a child, which am old? 18:14 is any thing too hard for the lord? at the time appointed i will return unto thee, according to the time of life, and sarah shall have a son. 18:15 then sarah denied, saying, i laughed not; for she was afraid. and he said, nay; but thou didst laugh. 18:16 and the men rose up from thence, and looked toward sodom: and abraham went with them to bring them on the way. 18:17 and the lord said, shall i hide from abraham that thing which i do; 18:18 seeing that abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him? 18:19 for i know him, that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the lord, to do justice and judgment; that the lord may bring upon abraham that which he hath spoken of him. 18:20 and the lord said, because the cry of sodom and gomorrah is great, and because their sin is very grievous; 18:21 i will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not, i will know. 18:22 and the men turned their faces from thence, and went toward sodom: but abraham stood yet before the lord. 18:23 and abraham drew near, and said, wilt thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked? 18:24 peradventure there be fifty righteous within the city: wilt thou also destroy and not spare the place for the fifty righteous that are therein? 18:25 that be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked: and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far from thee: shall not the judge of all the earth do right? 18:26 and the lord said, if i find in sodom fifty righteous within the city, then i will spare all the place for their sakes. 18:27 and abraham answered and said, behold now, i have taken upon me to speak unto the lord, which am but dust and ashes: 18:28 peradventure there shall lack five of the fifty righteous: wilt thou destroy all the city for lack of five? and he said, if i find there forty and five, i will not destroy it. 18:29 and he spake unto him yet again, and said, peradventure there shall be forty found there. and he said, i will not do it for forty’s sake. 18:30 and he said unto him, oh let not the lord be angry, and i will speak: peradventure there shall thirty be found there. and he said, i will not do it, if i find thirty there. 18:31 and he said, behold now, i have taken upon me to speak unto the lord: peradventure there shall be twenty found there. and he said, i will not destroy it for twenty’s sake. 18:32 and he said, oh let not the lord be angry, and i will speak yet but this once: peradventure ten shall be found there. and he said, i will not destroy it for ten’s sake. 18:33 and the lord went his way, as soon as he had left communing with abraham: and abraham returned unto his place. 19:1 and there came two angels to sodom at even; and lot sat in the gate of sodom: and lot seeing them rose up to meet them; and he bowed himself with his face toward the ground; 19:2 and he said, behold now, my lords, turn in, i pray you, into your servant’s house, and tarry all night, and wash your feet, and ye shall rise up early, and go on your ways. and they said, nay; but we will abide in the street all night. 19:3 and he pressed upon them greatly; and they turned in unto him, and entered into his house; and he made them a feast, and did bake unleavened bread, and they did eat. 19:4 but before they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of sodom, compassed the house round, both old and young, all the people from every quarter: 19:5 and they called unto lot, and said unto him, where are the men which came in to thee this night? bring them out unto us, that we may know them. 19:6 and lot went out at the door unto them, and shut the door after him, 19:7 and said, i pray you, brethren, do not so wickedly. 19:8 behold now, i have two daughters which have not known man; let me, i pray you, bring them out unto you, and do ye to them as is good in your eyes: only unto these men do nothing; for therefore came they under the shadow of my roof. 19:9 and they said, stand back. and they said again, this one fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge: now will we deal worse with thee, than with them. and they pressed sore upon the man, even lot, and came near to break the door. 19:10 but the men put forth their hand, and pulled lot into the house to them, and shut to the door. 19:11 and they smote the men that were at the door of the house with blindness, both small and great: so that they wearied themselves to find the door. 19:12 and the men said unto lot, hast thou here any besides? son in law, and thy sons, and thy daughters, and whatsoever thou hast in the city, bring them out of this place: 19:13 for we will destroy this place, because the cry of them is waxen great before the face of the lord; and the lord hath sent us to destroy it. 19:14 and lot went out, and spake unto his sons in law, which married his daughters, and said, up, get you out of this place; for the lord will destroy this city. but he seemed as one that mocked unto his sons in law. 19:15 and when the morning arose, then the angels hastened lot, saying, arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters, which are here; lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city. 19:16 and while he lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and upon the hand of his wife, and upon the hand of his two daughters; the lord being merciful unto him: and they brought him forth, and set him without the city. 19:17 and it came to pass, when they had brought them forth abroad, that he said, escape for thy life; look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the plain; escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed. 19:18 and lot said unto them, oh, not so, my lord: 19:19 behold now, thy servant hath found grace in thy sight, and thou hast magnified thy mercy, which thou hast shewed unto me in saving my life; and i cannot escape to the mountain, lest some evil take me, and i die: 19:20 behold now, this city is near to flee unto, and it is a little one: oh, let me escape thither, (is it not a little one?) and my soul shall live. 19:21 and he said unto him, see, i have accepted thee concerning this thing also, that i will not overthrow this city, for the which thou hast spoken. 19:22 haste thee, escape thither; for i cannot do anything till thou be come thither. therefore the name of the city was called zoar. 19:23 the sun was risen upon the earth when lot entered into zoar. 19:24 then the lord rained upon sodom and upon gomorrah brimstone and fire from the lord out of heaven; 19:25 and he overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon the ground. 19:26 but his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a pillar of salt. 19:27 and abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where he stood before the lord: 19:28 and he looked toward sodom and gomorrah, and toward all the land of the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace. 19:29 and it came to pass, when god destroyed the cities of the plain, that god remembered abraham, and sent lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in the which lot dwelt. 19:30 and lot went up out of zoar, and dwelt in the mountain, and his two daughters with him; for he feared to dwell in zoar: and he dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters. 19:31 and the firstborn said unto the younger, our father is old, and there is not a man in the earth to come in unto us after the manner of all the earth: 19:32 come, let us make our father drink wine, and we will lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father. 19:33 and they made their father drink wine that night: and the firstborn went in, and lay with her father; and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose. 19:34 and it came to pass on the morrow, that the firstborn said unto the younger, behold, i lay yesternight with my father: let us make him drink wine this night also; and go thou in, and lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father. 19:35 and they made their father drink wine that night also: and the younger arose, and lay with him; and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose. 19:36 thus were both the daughters of lot with child by their father. 19:37 and the first born bare a son, and called his name moab: the same is the father of the moabites unto this day. 19:38 and the younger, she also bare a son, and called his name benammi: the same is the father of the children of ammon unto this day. 20:1 and abraham journeyed from thence toward the south country, and dwelled between kadesh and shur, and sojourned in gerar. 20:2 and abraham said of sarah his wife, she is my sister: and abimelech king of gerar sent, and took sarah. 20:3 but god came to abimelech in a dream by night, and said to him, behold, thou art but a dead man, for the woman which thou hast taken; for she is a man’s wife. 20:4 but abimelech had not come near her: and he said, lord, wilt thou slay also a righteous nation? 20:5 said he not unto me, she is my sister? and she, even she herself said, he is my brother: in the integrity of my heart and innocency of my hands have i done this. 20:6 and god said unto him in a dream, yea, i know that thou didst this in the integrity of thy heart; for i also withheld thee from sinning against me: therefore suffered i thee not to touch her. 20:7 now therefore restore the man his wife; for he is a prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live: and if thou restore her not, know thou that thou shalt surely die, thou, and all that are thine. 20:8 therefore abimelech rose early in the morning, and called all his servants, and told all these things in their ears: and the men were sore afraid. 20:9 then abimelech called abraham, and said unto him, what hast thou done unto us? and what have i offended thee, that thou hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin? thou hast done deeds unto me that ought not to be done. 20:10 and abimelech said unto abraham, what sawest thou, that thou hast done this thing? 20:11 and abraham said, because i thought, surely the fear of god is not in this place; and they will slay me for my wife’s sake. 20:12 and yet indeed she is my sister; she is the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife. 20:13 and it came to pass, when god caused me to wander from my father’s house, that i said unto her, this is thy kindness which thou shalt shew unto me; at every place whither we shall come, say of me, he is my brother. 20:14 and abimelech took sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and womenservants, and gave them unto abraham, and restored him sarah his wife. 20:15 and abimelech said, behold, my land is before thee: dwell where it pleaseth thee. 20:16 and unto sarah he said, behold, i have given thy brother a thousand pieces of silver: behold, he is to thee a covering of the eyes, unto all that are with thee, and with all other: thus she was reproved. 20:17 so abraham prayed unto god: and god healed abimelech, and his wife, and his maidservants; and they bare children. 20:18 for the lord had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of abimelech, because of sarah abraham’s wife. 21:1 and the lord visited sarah as he had said, and the lord did unto sarah as he had spoken. 21:2 for sarah conceived, and bare abraham a son in his old age, at the set time of which god had spoken to him. 21:3 and abraham called the name of his son that was born unto him, whom sarah bare to him, isaac. 21:4 and abraham circumcised his son isaac being eight days old, as god had commanded him. 21:5 and abraham was an hundred years old, when his son isaac was born unto him. 21:6 and sarah said, god hath made me to laugh, so that all that hear will laugh with me. 21:7 and she said, who would have said unto abraham, that sarah should have given children suck? for i have born him a son in his old age. 21:8 and the child grew, and was weaned: and abraham made a great feast the same day that isaac was weaned. 21:9 and sarah saw the son of hagar the egyptian, which she had born unto abraham, mocking. 21:10 wherefore she said unto abraham, cast out this bondwoman and her son: for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even with isaac. 21:11 and the thing was very grievous in abraham’s sight because of his son. 21:12 and god said unto abraham, let it not be grievous in thy sight because of the lad, and because of thy bondwoman; in all that sarah hath said unto thee, hearken unto her voice; for in isaac shall thy seed be called. 21:13 and also of the son of the bondwoman will i make a nation, because he is thy seed. 21:14 and abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread, and a bottle of water, and gave it unto hagar, putting it on her shoulder, and the child, and sent her away: and she departed, and wandered in the wilderness of beersheba. 21:15 and the water was spent in the bottle, and she cast the child under one of the shrubs. 21:16 and she went, and sat her down over against him a good way off, as it were a bow shot: for she said, let me not see the death of the child. and she sat over against him, and lift up her voice, and wept. 21:17 and god heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of god called to hagar out of heaven, and said unto her, what aileth thee, hagar? fear not; for god hath heard the voice of the lad where he is. 21:18 arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand; for i will make him a great nation. 21:19 and god opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water; and she went, and filled the bottle with water, and gave the lad drink. 21:20 and god was with the lad; and he grew, and dwelt in the wilderness, and became an archer. 21:21 and he dwelt in the wilderness of paran: and his mother took him a wife out of the land of egypt. 21:22 and it came to pass at that time, that abimelech and phichol the chief captain of his host spake unto abraham, saying, god is with thee in all that thou doest: 21:23 now therefore swear unto me here by god that thou wilt not deal falsely with me, nor with my son, nor with my son’s son: but according to the kindness that i have done unto thee, thou shalt do unto me, and to the land wherein thou hast sojourned. 21:24 and abraham said, i will swear. 21:25 and abraham reproved abimelech because of a well of water, which abimelech’s servants had violently taken away. 21:26 and abimelech said, i wot not who hath done this thing; neither didst thou tell me, neither yet heard i of it, but to day. 21:27 and abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave them unto abimelech; and both of them made a covenant. 21:28 and abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves. 21:29 and abimelech said unto abraham, what mean these seven ewe lambs which thou hast set by themselves? 21:30 and he said, for these seven ewe lambs shalt thou take of my hand, that they may be a witness unto me, that i have digged this well. 21:31 wherefore he called that place beersheba; because there they sware both of them. 21:32 thus they made a covenant at beersheba: then abimelech rose up, and phichol the chief captain of his host, and they returned into the land of the philistines. 21:33 and abraham planted a grove in beersheba, and called there on the name of the lord, the everlasting god. 21:34 and abraham sojourned in the philistines’ land many days. 22:1 and it came to pass after these things, that god did tempt abraham, and said unto him, abraham: and he said, behold, here i am. 22:2 and he said, take now thy son, thine only son isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which i will tell thee of. 22:3 and abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his ass, and took two of his young men with him, and isaac his son, and clave the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went unto the place of which god had told him. 22:4 then on the third day abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the place afar off. 22:5 and abraham said unto his young men, abide ye here with the ass; and i and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you. 22:6 and abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon isaac his son; and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife; and they went both of them together. 22:7 and isaac spake unto abraham his father, and said, my father: and he said, here am i, my son. and he said, behold the fire and the wood: but where is the lamb for a burnt offering? 22:8 and abraham said, my son, god will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering: so they went both of them together. 22:9 and they came to the place which god had told him of; and abraham built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound isaac his son, and laid him on the altar upon the wood. 22:10 and abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his son. 22:11 and the angel of the lord called unto him out of heaven, and said, abraham, abraham: and he said, here am i. 22:12 and he said, lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him: for now i know that thou fearest god, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son from me. 22:13 and abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold behind him a ram caught in a thicket by his horns: and abraham went and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt offering in the stead of his son. 22:14 and abraham called the name of that place jehovahjireh: as it is said to this day, in the mount of the lord it shall be seen. 22:15 and the angel of the lord called unto abraham out of heaven the second time, 22:16 and said, by myself have i sworn, saith the lord, for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son: 22:17 that in blessing i will bless thee, and in multiplying i will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies; 22:18 and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice. 22:19 so abraham returned unto his young men, and they rose up and went together to beersheba; and abraham dwelt at beersheba. 22:20 and it came to pass after these things, that it was told abraham, saying, behold, milcah, she hath also born children unto thy brother nahor; 22:21 huz his firstborn, and buz his brother, and kemuel the father of aram, 22:22 and chesed, and hazo, and pildash, and jidlaph, and bethuel. 22:23 and bethuel begat rebekah: these eight milcah did bear to nahor, abraham’s brother. 22:24 and his concubine, whose name was reumah, she bare also tebah, and gaham, and thahash, and maachah. 23:1 and sarah was an hundred and seven and twenty years old: these were the years of the life of sarah. 23:2 and sarah died in kirjatharba; the same is hebron in the land of canaan: and abraham came to mourn for sarah, and to weep for her. 23:3 and abraham stood up from before his dead, and spake unto the sons of heth, saying, 23:4 i am a stranger and a sojourner with you: give me a possession of a buryingplace with you, that i may bury my dead out of my sight. 23:5 and the children of heth answered abraham, saying unto him, 23:6 hear us, my lord: thou art a mighty prince among us: in the choice of our sepulchres bury thy dead; none of us shall withhold from thee his sepulchre, but that thou mayest bury thy dead. 23:7 and abraham stood up, and bowed himself to the people of the land, even to the children of heth. 23:8 and he communed with them, saying, if it be your mind that i should bury my dead out of my sight; hear me, and intreat for me to ephron the son of zohar, 23:9 that he may give me the cave of machpelah, which he hath, which is in the end of his field; for as much money as it is worth he shall give it me for a possession of a buryingplace amongst you. 23:10 and ephron dwelt among the children of heth: and ephron the hittite answered abraham in the audience of the children of heth, even of all that went in at the gate of his city, saying, 23:11 nay, my lord, hear me: the field give i thee, and the cave that is therein, i give it thee; in the presence of the sons of my people give i it thee: bury thy dead. 23:12 and abraham bowed down himself before the people of the land. 23:13 and he spake unto ephron in the audience of the people of the land, saying, but if thou wilt give it, i pray thee, hear me: i will give thee money for the field; take it of me, and i will bury my dead there. 23:14 and ephron answered abraham, saying unto him, 23:15 my lord, hearken unto me: the land is worth four hundred shekels of silver; what is that betwixt me and thee? bury therefore thy dead. 23:16 and abraham hearkened unto ephron; and abraham weighed to ephron the silver, which he had named in the audience of the sons of heth, four hundred shekels of silver, current money with the merchant. 23:17 and the field of ephron which was in machpelah, which was before mamre, the field, and the cave which was therein, and all the trees that were in the field, that were in all the borders round about, were made sure 23:18 unto abraham for a possession in the presence of the children of heth, before all that went in at the gate of his city. 23:19 and after this, abraham buried sarah his wife in the cave of the field of machpelah before mamre: the same is hebron in the land of canaan. 23:20 and the field, and the cave that is therein, were made sure unto abraham for a possession of a buryingplace by the sons of heth. 24:1 and abraham was old, and well stricken in age: and the lord had blessed abraham in all things. 24:2 and abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that ruled over all that he had, put, i pray thee, thy hand under my thigh: 24:3 and i will make thee swear by the lord, the god of heaven, and the god of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of the daughters of the canaanites, among whom i dwell: 24:4 but thou shalt go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son isaac. 24:5 and the servant said unto him, peradventure the woman will not be willing to follow me unto this land: must i needs bring thy son again unto the land from whence thou camest? 24:6 and abraham said unto him, beware thou that thou bring not my son thither again. 24:7 the lord god of heaven, which took me from my father’s house, and from the land of my kindred, and which spake unto me, and that sware unto me, saying, unto thy seed will i give this land; he shall send his angel before thee, and thou shalt take a wife unto my son from thence. 24:8 and if the woman will not be willing to follow thee, then thou shalt be clear from this my oath: only bring not my son thither again. 24:9 and the servant put his hand under the thigh of abraham his master, and sware to him concerning that matter. 24:10 and the servant took ten camels of the camels of his master, and departed; for all the goods of his master were in his hand: and he arose, and went to mesopotamia, unto the city of nahor. 24:11 and he made his camels to kneel down without the city by a well of water at the time of the evening, even the time that women go out to draw water. 24:12 and he said o lord god of my master abraham, i pray thee, send me good speed this day, and shew kindness unto my master abraham. 24:13 behold, i stand here by the well of water; and the daughters of the men of the city come out to draw water: 24:14 and let it come to pass, that the damsel to whom i shall say, let down thy pitcher, i pray thee, that i may drink; and she shall say, drink, and i will give thy camels drink also: let the same be she that thou hast appointed for thy servant isaac; and thereby shall i know that thou hast shewed kindness unto my master. 24:15 and it came to pass, before he had done speaking, that, behold, rebekah came out, who was born to bethuel, son of milcah, the wife of nahor, abraham’s brother, with her pitcher upon her shoulder. 24:16 and the damsel was very fair to look upon, a virgin, neither had any man known her: and she went down to the well, and filled her pitcher, and came up. 24:17 and the servant ran to meet her, and said, let me, i pray thee, drink a little water of thy pitcher. 24:18 and she said, drink, my lord: and she hasted, and let down her pitcher upon her hand, and gave him drink. 24:19 and when she had done giving him drink, she said, i will draw water for thy camels also, until they have done drinking. 24:20 and she hasted, and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran again unto the well to draw water, and drew for all his camels. 24:21 and the man wondering at her held his peace, to wit whether the lord had made his journey prosperous or not. 24:22 and it came to pass, as the camels had done drinking, that the man took a golden earring of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold; 24:23 and said, whose daughter art thou? tell me, i pray thee: is there room in thy father’s house for us to lodge in? 24:24 and she said unto him, i am the daughter of bethuel the son of milcah, which she bare unto nahor. 24:25 she said moreover unto him, we have both straw and provender enough, and room to lodge in. 24:26 and the man bowed down his head, and worshipped the lord. 24:27 and he said, blessed be the lord god of my master abraham, who hath not left destitute my master of his mercy and his truth: i being in the way, the lord led me to the house of my master’s brethren. 24:28 and the damsel ran, and told them of her mother’s house these things. 24:29 and rebekah had a brother, and his name was laban: and laban ran out unto the man, unto the well. 24:30 and it came to pass, when he saw the earring and bracelets upon his sister’s hands, and when he heard the words of rebekah his sister, saying, thus spake the man unto me; that he came unto the man; and, behold, he stood by the camels at the well. 24:31 and he said, come in, thou blessed of the lord; wherefore standest thou without? for i have prepared the house, and room for the camels. 24:32 and the man came into the house: and he ungirded his camels, and gave straw and provender for the camels, and water to wash his feet, and the men’s feet that were with him. 24:33 and there was set meat before him to eat: but he said, i will not eat, until i have told mine errand. and he said, speak on. 24:34 and he said, i am abraham’s servant. 24:35 and the lord hath blessed my master greatly; and he is become great: and he hath given him flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold, and menservants, and maidservants, and camels, and asses. 24:36 and sarah my master’s wife bare a son to my master when she was old: and unto him hath he given all that he hath. 24:37 and my master made me swear, saying, thou shalt not take a wife to my son of the daughters of the canaanites, in whose land i dwell: 24:38 but thou shalt go unto my father’s house, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son. 24:39 and i said unto my master, peradventure the woman will not follow me. 24:40 and he said unto me, the lord, before whom i walk, will send his angel with thee, and prosper thy way; and thou shalt take a wife for my son of my kindred, and of my father’s house: 24:41 then shalt thou be clear from this my oath, when thou comest to my kindred; and if they give not thee one, thou shalt be clear from my oath. 24:42 and i came this day unto the well, and said, o lord god of my master abraham, if now thou do prosper my way which i go: 24:43 behold, i stand by the well of water; and it shall come to pass, that when the virgin cometh forth to draw water, and i say to her, give me, i pray thee, a little water of thy pitcher to drink; 24:44 and she say to me, both drink thou, and i will also draw for thy camels: let the same be the woman whom the lord hath appointed out for my master’s son. 24:45 and before i had done speaking in mine heart, behold, rebekah came forth with her pitcher on her shoulder; and she went down unto the well, and drew water: and i said unto her, let me drink, i pray thee. 24:46 and she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder, and said, drink, and i will give thy camels drink also: so i drank, and she made the camels drink also. 24:47 and i asked her, and said, whose daughter art thou? and she said, the daughter of bethuel, nahor’s son, whom milcah bare unto him: and i put the earring upon her face, and the bracelets upon her hands. 24:48 and i bowed down my head, and worshipped the lord, and blessed the lord god of my master abraham, which had led me in the right way to take my master’s brother’s daughter unto his son. 24:49 and now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell me: and if not, tell me; that i may turn to the right hand, or to the left. 24:50 then laban and bethuel answered and said, the thing proceedeth from the lord: we cannot speak unto thee bad or good. 24:51 behold, rebekah is before thee, take her, and go, and let her be thy master’s son’s wife, as the lord hath spoken. 24:52 and it came to pass, that, when abraham’s servant heard their words, he worshipped the lord, bowing himself to the earth. 24:53 and the servant brought forth jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment, and gave them to rebekah: he gave also to her brother and to her mother precious things. 24:54 and they did eat and drink, he and the men that were with him, and tarried all night; and they rose up in the morning, and he said, send me away unto my master. 24:55 and her brother and her mother said, let the damsel abide with us a few days, at the least ten; after that she shall go. 24:56 and he said unto them, hinder me not, seeing the lord hath prospered my way; send me away that i may go to my master. 24:57 and they said, we will call the damsel, and enquire at her mouth. 24:58 and they called rebekah, and said unto her, wilt thou go with this man? and she said, i will go. 24:59 and they sent away rebekah their sister, and her nurse, and abraham’s servant, and his men. 24:60 and they blessed rebekah, and said unto her, thou art our sister, be thou the mother of thousands of millions, and let thy seed possess the gate of those which hate them. 24:61 and rebekah arose, and her damsels, and they rode upon the camels, and followed the man: and the servant took rebekah, and went his way. 24:62 and isaac came from the way of the well lahairoi; for he dwelt in the south country. 24:63 and isaac went out to meditate in the field at the eventide: and he lifted up his eyes, and saw, and, behold, the camels were coming. 24:64 and rebekah lifted up her eyes, and when she saw isaac, she lighted off the camel. 24:65 for she had said unto the servant, what man is this that walketh in the field to meet us? and the servant had said, it is my master: therefore she took a vail, and covered herself. 24:66 and the servant told isaac all things that he had done. 24:67 and isaac brought her into his mother sarah’s tent, and took rebekah, and she became his wife; and he loved her: and isaac was comforted after his mother’s death. 25:1 then again abraham took a wife, and her name was keturah. 25:2 and she bare him zimran, and jokshan, and medan, and midian, and ishbak, and shuah. 25:3 and jokshan begat sheba, and dedan. and the sons of dedan were asshurim, and letushim, and leummim. 25:4 and the sons of midian; ephah, and epher, and hanoch, and abidah, and eldaah. all these were the children of keturah. 25:5 and abraham gave all that he had unto isaac. 25:6 but unto the sons of the concubines, which abraham had, abraham gave gifts, and sent them away from isaac his son, while he yet lived, eastward, unto the east country. 25:7 and these are the days of the years of abraham’s life which he lived, an hundred threescore and fifteen years. 25:8 then abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old age, an old man, and full of years; and was gathered to his people. 25:9 and his sons isaac and ishmael buried him in the cave of machpelah, in the field of ephron the son of zohar the hittite, which is before mamre; 25:10 the field which abraham purchased of the sons of heth: there was abraham buried, and sarah his wife. 25:11 and it came to pass after the death of abraham, that god blessed his son isaac; and isaac dwelt by the well lahairoi. 25:12 now these are the generations of ishmael, abraham’s son, whom hagar the egyptian, sarah’s handmaid, bare unto abraham: 25:13 and these are the names of the sons of ishmael, by their names, according to their generations: the firstborn of ishmael, nebajoth; and kedar, and adbeel, and mibsam, 25:14 and mishma, and dumah, and massa, 25:15 hadar, and tema, jetur, naphish, and kedemah: 25:16 these are the sons of ishmael, and these are their names, by their towns, and by their castles; twelve princes according to their nations. 25:17 and these are the years of the life of ishmael, an hundred and thirty and seven years: and he gave up the ghost and died; and was gathered unto his people. 25:18 and they dwelt from havilah unto shur, that is before egypt, as thou goest toward assyria: and he died in the presence of all his brethren. 25:19 and these are the generations of isaac, abraham’s son: abraham begat isaac: 25:20 and isaac was forty years old when he took rebekah to wife, the daughter of bethuel the syrian of padanaram, the sister to laban the syrian. 25:21 and isaac intreated the lord for his wife, because she was barren: and the lord was intreated of him, and rebekah his wife conceived. 25:22 and the children struggled together within her; and she said, if it be so, why am i thus? and she went to enquire of the lord. 25:23 and the lord said unto her, two nations are in thy womb, and two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels; and the one people shall be stronger than the other people; and the elder shall serve the younger. 25:24 and when her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold, there were twins in her womb. 25:25 and the first came out red, all over like an hairy garment; and they called his name esau. 25:26 and after that came his brother out, and his hand took hold on esau’s heel; and his name was called jacob: and isaac was threescore years old when she bare them. 25:27 and the boys grew: and esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the field; and jacob was a plain man, dwelling in tents. 25:28 and isaac loved esau, because he did eat of his venison: but rebekah loved jacob. 25:29 and jacob sod pottage: and esau came from the field, and he was faint: 25:30 and esau said to jacob, feed me, i pray thee, with that same red pottage; for i am faint: therefore was his name called edom. 25:31 and jacob said, sell me this day thy birthright. 25:32 and esau said, behold, i am at the point to die: and what profit shall this birthright do to me? 25:33 and jacob said, swear to me this day; and he sware unto him: and he sold his birthright unto jacob. 25:34 then jacob gave esau bread and pottage of lentiles; and he did eat and drink, and rose up, and went his way: thus esau despised his birthright. 26:1 and there was a famine in the land, beside the first famine that was in the days of abraham. and isaac went unto abimelech king of the philistines unto gerar. 26:2 and the lord appeared unto him, and said, go not down into egypt; dwell in the land which i shall tell thee of: 26:3 sojourn in this land, and i will be with thee, and will bless thee; for unto thee, and unto thy seed, i will give all these countries, and i will perform the oath which i sware unto abraham thy father; 26:4 and i will make thy seed to multiply as the stars of heaven, and will give unto thy seed all these countries; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; 26:5 because that abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws. 26:6 and isaac dwelt in gerar: 26:7 and the men of the place asked him of his wife; and he said, she is my sister: for he feared to say, she is my wife; lest, said he, the men of the place should kill me for rebekah; because she was fair to look upon. 26:8 and it came to pass, when he had been there a long time, that abimelech king of the philistines looked out at a window, and saw, and, behold, isaac was sporting with rebekah his wife. 26:9 and abimelech called isaac, and said, behold, of a surety she is thy wife; and how saidst thou, she is my sister? and isaac said unto him, because i said, lest i die for her. 26:10 and abimelech said, what is this thou hast done unto us? one of the people might lightly have lien with thy wife, and thou shouldest have brought guiltiness upon us. 26:11 and abimelech charged all his people, saying, he that toucheth this man or his wife shall surely be put to death. 26:12 then isaac sowed in that land, and received in the same year an hundredfold: and the lord blessed him. 26:13 and the man waxed great, and went forward, and grew until he became very great: 26:14 for he had possession of flocks, and possession of herds, and great store of servants: and the philistines envied him. 26:15 for all the wells which his father’s servants had digged in the days of abraham his father, the philistines had stopped them, and filled them with earth. 26:16 and abimelech said unto isaac, go from us; for thou art much mightier than we. 26:17 and isaac departed thence, and pitched his tent in the valley of gerar, and dwelt there. 26:18 and isaac digged again the wells of water, which they had digged in the days of abraham his father; for the philistines had stopped them after the death of abraham: and he called their names after the names by which his father had called them. 26:19 and isaac’s servants digged in the valley, and found there a well of springing water. 26:20 and the herdmen of gerar did strive with isaac’s herdmen, saying, the water is ours: and he called the name of the well esek; because they strove with him. 26:21 and they digged another well, and strove for that also: and he called the name of it sitnah. 26:22 and he removed from thence, and digged another well; and for that they strove not: and he called the name of it rehoboth; and he said, for now the lord hath made room for us, and we shall be fruitful in the land. 26:23 and he went up from thence to beersheba. 26:24 and the lord appeared unto him the same night, and said, i am the god of abraham thy father: fear not, for i am with thee, and will bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant abraham’s sake. 26:25 and he builded an altar there, and called upon the name of the lord, and pitched his tent there: and there isaac’s servants digged a well. 26:26 then abimelech went to him from gerar, and ahuzzath one of his friends, and phichol the chief captain of his army. 26:27 and isaac said unto them, wherefore come ye to me, seeing ye hate me, and have sent me away from you? 26:28 and they said, we saw certainly that the lord was with thee: and we said, let there be now an oath betwixt us, even betwixt us and thee, and let us make a covenant with thee; 26:29 that thou wilt do us no hurt, as we have not touched thee, and as we have done unto thee nothing but good, and have sent thee away in peace: thou art now the blessed of the lord. 26:30 and he made them a feast, and they did eat and drink. 26:31 and they rose up betimes in the morning, and sware one to another: and isaac sent them away, and they departed from him in peace. 26:32 and it came to pass the same day, that isaac’s servants came, and told him concerning the well which they had digged, and said unto him, we have found water. 26:33 and he called it shebah: therefore the name of the city is beersheba unto this day. 26:34 and esau was forty years old when he took to wife judith the daughter of beeri the hittite, and bashemath the daughter of elon the hittite: 26:35 which were a grief of mind unto isaac and to rebekah. 27:1 and it came to pass, that when isaac was old, and his eyes were dim, so that he could not see, he called esau his eldest son, and said unto him, my son: and he said unto him, behold, here am i. 27:2 and he said, behold now, i am old, i know not the day of my death: 27:3 now therefore take, i pray thee, thy weapons, thy quiver and thy bow, and go out to the field, and take me some venison; 27:4 and make me savoury meat, such as i love, and bring it to me, that i may eat; that my soul may bless thee before i die. 27:5 and rebekah heard when isaac spake to esau his son. and esau went to the field to hunt for venison, and to bring it. 27:6 and rebekah spake unto jacob her son, saying, behold, i heard thy father speak unto esau thy brother, saying, 27:7 bring me venison, and make me savoury meat, that i may eat, and bless thee before the lord before my death. 27:8 now therefore, my son, obey my voice according to that which i command thee. 27:9 go now to the flock, and fetch me from thence two good kids of the goats; and i will make them savoury meat for thy father, such as he loveth: 27:10 and thou shalt bring it to thy father, that he may eat, and that he may bless thee before his death. 27:11 and jacob said to rebekah his mother, behold, esau my brother is a hairy man, and i am a smooth man: 27:12 my father peradventure will feel me, and i shall seem to him as a deceiver; and i shall bring a curse upon me, and not a blessing. 27:13 and his mother said unto him, upon me be thy curse, my son: only obey my voice, and go fetch me them. 27:14 and he went, and fetched, and brought them to his mother: and his mother made savoury meat, such as his father loved. 27:15 and rebekah took goodly raiment of her eldest son esau, which were with her in the house, and put them upon jacob her younger son: 27:16 and she put the skins of the kids of the goats upon his hands, and upon the smooth of his neck: 27:17 and she gave the savoury meat and the bread, which she had prepared, into the hand of her son jacob. 27:18 and he came unto his father, and said, my father: and he said, here am i; who art thou, my son? 27:19 and jacob said unto his father, i am esau thy first born; i have done according as thou badest me: arise, i pray thee, sit and eat of my venison, that thy soul may bless me. 27:20 and isaac said unto his son, how is it that thou hast found it so quickly, my son? and he said, because the lord thy god brought it to me. 27:21 and isaac said unto jacob, come near, i pray thee, that i may feel thee, my son, whether thou be my very son esau or not. 27:22 and jacob went near unto isaac his father; and he felt him, and said, the voice is jacob’s voice, but the hands are the hands of esau. 27:23 and he discerned him not, because his hands were hairy, as his brother esau’s hands: so he blessed him. 27:24 and he said, art thou my very son esau? and he said, i am. 27:25 and he said, bring it near to me, and i will eat of my son’s venison, that my soul may bless thee. and he brought it near to him, and he did eat: and he brought him wine and he drank. 27:26 and his father isaac said unto him, come near now, and kiss me, my son. 27:27 and he came near, and kissed him: and he smelled the smell of his raiment, and blessed him, and said, see, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the lord hath blessed: 27:28 therefore god give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and wine: 27:29 let people serve thee, and nations bow down to thee: be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother’s sons bow down to thee: cursed be every one that curseth thee, and blessed be he that blesseth thee. 27:30 and it came to pass, as soon as isaac had made an end of blessing jacob, and jacob was yet scarce gone out from the presence of isaac his father, that esau his brother came in from his hunting. 27:31 and he also had made savoury meat, and brought it unto his father, and said unto his father, let my father arise, and eat of his son’s venison, that thy soul may bless me. 27:32 and isaac his father said unto him, who art thou? and he said, i am thy son, thy firstborn esau. 27:33 and isaac trembled very exceedingly, and said, who? where is he that hath taken venison, and brought it me, and i have eaten of all before thou camest, and have blessed him? yea, and he shall be blessed. 27:34 and when esau heard the words of his father, he cried with a great and exceeding bitter cry, and said unto his father, bless me, even me also, o my father. 27:35 and he said, thy brother came with subtilty, and hath taken away thy blessing. 27:36 and he said, is not he rightly named jacob? for he hath supplanted me these two times: he took away my birthright; and, behold, now he hath taken away my blessing. and he said, hast thou not reserved a blessing for me? 27:37 and isaac answered and said unto esau, behold, i have made him thy lord, and all his brethren have i given to him for servants; and with corn and wine have i sustained him: and what shall i do now unto thee, my son? 27:38 and esau said unto his father, hast thou but one blessing, my father? bless me, even me also, o my father. and esau lifted up his voice, and wept. 27:39 and isaac his father answered and said unto him, behold, thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth, and of the dew of heaven from above; 27:40 and by thy sword shalt thou live, and shalt serve thy brother; and it shall come to pass when thou shalt have the dominion, that thou shalt break his yoke from off thy neck. 27:41 and esau hated jacob because of the blessing wherewith his father blessed him: and esau said in his heart, the days of mourning for my father are at hand; then will i slay my brother jacob. 27:42 and these words of esau her elder son were told to rebekah: and she sent and called jacob her younger son, and said unto him, behold, thy brother esau, as touching thee, doth comfort himself, purposing to kill thee. 27:43 now therefore, my son, obey my voice; arise, flee thou to laban my brother to haran; 27:44 and tarry with him a few days, until thy brother’s fury turn away; 27:45 until thy brother’s anger turn away from thee, and he forget that which thou hast done to him: then i will send, and fetch thee from thence: why should i be deprived also of you both in one day? 27:46 and rebekah said to isaac, i am weary of my life because of the daughters of heth: if jacob take a wife of the daughters of heth, such as these which are of the daughters of the land, what good shall my life do me? 28:1 and isaac called jacob, and blessed him, and charged him, and said unto him, thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of canaan. 28:2 arise, go to padanaram, to the house of bethuel thy mother’s father; and take thee a wife from thence of the daughters of laban thy mother’s brother. 28:3 and god almighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, that thou mayest be a multitude of people; 28:4 and give thee the blessing of abraham, to thee, and to thy seed with thee; that thou mayest inherit the land wherein thou art a stranger, which god gave unto abraham. 28:5 and isaac sent away jacob: and he went to padanaram unto laban, son of bethuel the syrian, the brother of rebekah, jacob’s and esau’s mother. 28:6 when esau saw that isaac had blessed jacob, and sent him away to padanaram, to take him a wife from thence; and that as he blessed him he gave him a charge, saying, thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of canaan; 28:7 and that jacob obeyed his father and his mother, and was gone to padanaram; 28:8 and esau seeing that the daughters of canaan pleased not isaac his father; 28:9 then went esau unto ishmael, and took unto the wives which he had mahalath the daughter of ishmael abraham’s son, the sister of nebajoth, to be his wife. 28:10 and jacob went out from beersheba, and went toward haran. 28:11 and he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there all night, because the sun was set; and he took of the stones of that place, and put them for his pillows, and lay down in that place to sleep. 28:12 and he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of god ascending and descending on it. 28:13 and, behold, the lord stood above it, and said, i am the lord god of abraham thy father, and the god of isaac: the land whereon thou liest, to thee will i give it, and to thy seed; 28:14 and thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south: and in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed. 28:15 and, behold, i am with thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou goest, and will bring thee again into this land; for i will not leave thee, until i have done that which i have spoken to thee of. 28:16 and jacob awaked out of his sleep, and he said, surely the lord is in this place; and i knew it not. 28:17 and he was afraid, and said, how dreadful is this place! this is none other but the house of god, and this is the gate of heaven. 28:18 and jacob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone that he had put for his pillows, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil upon the top of it. 28:19 and he called the name of that place bethel: but the name of that city was called luz at the first. 28:20 and jacob vowed a vow, saying, if god will be with me, and will keep me in this way that i go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, 28:21 so that i come again to my father’s house in peace; then shall the lord be my god: 28:22 and this stone, which i have set for a pillar, shall be god’s house: and of all that thou shalt give me i will surely give the tenth unto thee. 29:1 then jacob went on his journey, and came into the land of the people of the east. 29:2 and he looked, and behold a well in the field, and, lo, there were three flocks of sheep lying by it; for out of that well they watered the flocks: and a great stone was upon the well’s mouth. 29:3 and thither were all the flocks gathered: and they rolled the stone from the well’s mouth, and watered the sheep, and put the stone again upon the well’s mouth in his place. 29:4 and jacob said unto them, my brethren, whence be ye? and they said, of haran are we. 29:5 and he said unto them, know ye laban the son of nahor? and they said, we know him. 29:6 and he said unto them, is he well? and they said, he is well: and, behold, rachel his daughter cometh with the sheep. 29:7 and he said, lo, it is yet high day, neither is it time that the cattle should be gathered together: water ye the sheep, and go and feed them. 29:8 and they said, we cannot, until all the flocks be gathered together, and till they roll the stone from the well’s mouth; then we water the sheep. 29:9 and while he yet spake with them, rachel came with her father’s sheep; for she kept them. 29:10 and it came to pass, when jacob saw rachel the daughter of laban his mother’s brother, and the sheep of laban his mother’s brother, that jacob went near, and rolled the stone from the well’s mouth, and watered the flock of laban his mother’s brother. 29:11 and jacob kissed rachel, and lifted up his voice, and wept. 29:12 and jacob told rachel that he was her father’s brother, and that he was rebekah’s son: and she ran and told her father. 29:13 and it came to pass, when laban heard the tidings of jacob his sister’s son, that he ran to meet him, and embraced him, and kissed him, and brought him to his house. and he told laban all these things. 29:14 and laban said to him, surely thou art my bone and my flesh. and he abode with him the space of a month. 29:15 and laban said unto jacob, because thou art my brother, shouldest thou therefore serve me for nought? tell me, what shall thy wages be? 29:16 and laban had two daughters: the name of the elder was leah, and the name of the younger was rachel. 29:17 leah was tender eyed; but rachel was beautiful and well favoured. 29:18 and jacob loved rachel; and said, i will serve thee seven years for rachel thy younger daughter. 29:19 and laban said, it is better that i give her to thee, than that i should give her to another man: abide with me. 29:20 and jacob served seven years for rachel; and they seemed unto him but a few days, for the love he had to her. 29:21 and jacob said unto laban, give me my wife, for my days are fulfilled, that i may go in unto her. 29:22 and laban gathered together all the men of the place, and made a feast. 29:23 and it came to pass in the evening, that he took leah his daughter, and brought her to him; and he went in unto her. 29:24 and laban gave unto his daughter leah zilpah his maid for an handmaid. 29:25 and it came to pass, that in the morning, behold, it was leah: and he said to laban, what is this thou hast done unto me? did not i serve with thee for rachel? wherefore then hast thou beguiled me? 29:26 and laban said, it must not be so done in our country, to give the younger before the firstborn. 29:27 fulfil her week, and we will give thee this also for the service which thou shalt serve with me yet seven other years. 29:28 and jacob did so, and fulfilled her week: and he gave him rachel his daughter to wife also. 29:29 and laban gave to rachel his daughter bilhah his handmaid to be her maid. 29:30 and he went in also unto rachel, and he loved also rachel more than leah, and served with him yet seven other years. 29:31 and when the lord saw that leah was hated, he opened her womb: but rachel was barren. 29:32 and leah conceived, and bare a son, and she called his name reuben: for she said, surely the lord hath looked upon my affliction; now therefore my husband will love me. 29:33 and she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, because the lord hath heard i was hated, he hath therefore given me this son also: and she called his name simeon. 29:34 and she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, now this time will my husband be joined unto me, because i have born him three sons: therefore was his name called levi. 29:35 and she conceived again, and bare a son: and she said, now will i praise the lord: therefore she called his name judah; and left bearing. 30:1 and when rachel saw that she bare jacob no children, rachel envied her sister; and said unto jacob, give me children, or else i die. 30:2 and jacob’s anger was kindled against rachel: and he said, am i in god’s stead, who hath withheld from thee the fruit of the womb? 30:3 and she said, behold my maid bilhah, go in unto her; and she shall bear upon my knees, that i may also have children by her. 30:4 and she gave him bilhah her handmaid to wife: and jacob went in unto her. 30:5 and bilhah conceived, and bare jacob a son. 30:6 and rachel said, god hath judged me, and hath also heard my voice, and hath given me a son: therefore called she his name dan. 30:7 and bilhah rachel’s maid conceived again, and bare jacob a second son. 30:8 and rachel said, with great wrestlings have i wrestled with my sister, and i have prevailed: and she called his name naphtali. 30:9 when leah saw that she had left bearing, she took zilpah her maid, and gave her jacob to wife. 30:10 and zilpah leah’s maid bare jacob a son. 30:11 and leah said, a troop cometh: and she called his name gad. 30:12 and zilpah leah’s maid bare jacob a second son. 30:13 and leah said, happy am i, for the daughters will call me blessed: and she called his name asher. 30:14 and reuben went in the days of wheat harvest, and found mandrakes in the field, and brought them unto his mother leah. then rachel said to leah, give me, i pray thee, of thy son’s mandrakes. 30:15 and she said unto her, is it a small matter that thou hast taken my husband? and wouldest thou take away my son’s mandrakes also? and rachel said, therefore he shall lie with thee to night for thy son’s mandrakes. 30:16 and jacob came out of the field in the evening, and leah went out to meet him, and said, thou must come in unto me; for surely i have hired thee with my son’s mandrakes. and he lay with her that night. 30:17 and god hearkened unto leah, and she conceived, and bare jacob the fifth son. 30:18 and leah said, god hath given me my hire, because i have given my maiden to my husband: and she called his name issachar. 30:19 and leah conceived again, and bare jacob the sixth son. 30:20 and leah said, god hath endued me with a good dowry; now will my husband dwell with me, because i have born him six sons: and she called his name zebulun. 30:21 and afterwards she bare a daughter, and called her name dinah. 30:22 and god remembered rachel, and god hearkened to her, and opened her womb. 30:23 and she conceived, and bare a son; and said, god hath taken away my reproach: 30:24 and she called his name joseph; and said, the lord shall add to me another son. 30:25 and it came to pass, when rachel had born joseph, that jacob said unto laban, send me away, that i may go unto mine own place, and to my country. 30:26 give me my wives and my children, for whom i have served thee, and let me go: for thou knowest my service which i have done thee. 30:27 and laban said unto him, i pray thee, if i have found favour in thine eyes, tarry: for i have learned by experience that the lord hath blessed me for thy sake. 30:28 and he said, appoint me thy wages, and i will give it. 30:29 and he said unto him, thou knowest how i have served thee, and how thy cattle was with me. 30:30 for it was little which thou hadst before i came, and it is now increased unto a multitude; and the lord hath blessed thee since my coming: and now when shall i provide for mine own house also? 30:31 and he said, what shall i give thee? and jacob said, thou shalt not give me any thing: if thou wilt do this thing for me, i will again feed and keep thy flock. 30:32 i will pass through all thy flock to day, removing from thence all the speckled and spotted cattle, and all the brown cattle among the sheep, and the spotted and speckled among the goats: and of such shall be my hire. 30:33 so shall my righteousness answer for me in time to come, when it shall come for my hire before thy face: every one that is not speckled and spotted among the goats, and brown among the sheep, that shall be counted stolen with me. 30:34 and laban said, behold, i would it might be according to thy word. 30:35 and he removed that day the he goats that were ringstraked and spotted, and all the she goats that were speckled and spotted, and every one that had some white in it, and all the brown among the sheep, and gave them into the hand of his sons. 30:36 and he set three days’ journey betwixt himself and jacob: and jacob fed the rest of laban’s flocks. 30:37 and jacob took him rods of green poplar, and of the hazel and chestnut tree; and pilled white strakes in them, and made the white appear which was in the rods. 30:38 and he set the rods which he had pilled before the flocks in the gutters in the watering troughs when the flocks came to drink, that they should conceive when they came to drink. 30:39 and the flocks conceived before the rods, and brought forth cattle ringstraked, speckled, and spotted. 30:40 and jacob did separate the lambs, and set the faces of the flocks toward the ringstraked, and all the brown in the flock of laban; and he put his own flocks by themselves, and put them not unto laban’s cattle. 30:41 and it came to pass, whensoever the stronger cattle did conceive, that jacob laid the rods before the eyes of the cattle in the gutters, that they might conceive among the rods. 30:42 but when the cattle were feeble, he put them not in: so the feebler were laban’s, and the stronger jacob’s. 30:43 and the man increased exceedingly, and had much cattle, and maidservants, and menservants, and camels, and asses. 31:1 and he heard the words of laban’s sons, saying, jacob hath taken away all that was our father’s; and of that which was our father’s hath he gotten all this glory. 31:2 and jacob beheld the countenance of laban, and, behold, it was not toward him as before. 31:3 and the lord said unto jacob, return unto the land of thy fathers, and to thy kindred; and i will be with thee. 31:4 and jacob sent and called rachel and leah to the field unto his flock, 31:5 and said unto them, i see your father’s countenance, that it is not toward me as before; but the god of my father hath been with me. 31:6 and ye know that with all my power i have served your father. 31:7 and your father hath deceived me, and changed my wages ten times; but god suffered him not to hurt me. 31:8 if he said thus, the speckled shall be thy wages; then all the cattle bare speckled: and if he said thus, the ringstraked shall be thy hire; then bare all the cattle ringstraked. 31:9 thus god hath taken away the cattle of your father, and given them to me. 31:10 and it came to pass at the time that the cattle conceived, that i lifted up mine eyes, and saw in a dream, and, behold, the rams which leaped upon the cattle were ringstraked, speckled, and grisled. 31:11 and the angel of god spake unto me in a dream, saying, jacob: and i said, here am i. 31:12 and he said, lift up now thine eyes, and see, all the rams which leap upon the cattle are ringstraked, speckled, and grisled: for i have seen all that laban doeth unto thee. 31:13 i am the god of bethel, where thou anointedst the pillar, and where thou vowedst a vow unto me: now arise, get thee out from this land, and return unto the land of thy kindred. 31:14 and rachel and leah answered and said unto him, is there yet any portion or inheritance for us in our father’s house? 31:15 are we not counted of him strangers? for he hath sold us, and hath quite devoured also our money. 31:16 for all the riches which god hath taken from our father, that is ours, and our children’s: now then, whatsoever god hath said unto thee, do. 31:17 then jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives upon camels; 31:18 and he carried away all his cattle, and all his goods which he had gotten, the cattle of his getting, which he had gotten in padanaram, for to go to isaac his father in the land of canaan. 31:19 and laban went to shear his sheep: and rachel had stolen the images that were her father’s. 31:20 and jacob stole away unawares to laban the syrian, in that he told him not that he fled. 31:21 so he fled with all that he had; and he rose up, and passed over the river, and set his face toward the mount gilead. 31:22 and it was told laban on the third day that jacob was fled. 31:23 and he took his brethren with him, and pursued after him seven days’ journey; and they overtook him in the mount gilead. 31:24 and god came to laban the syrian in a dream by night, and said unto him, take heed that thou speak not to jacob either good or bad. 31:25 then laban overtook jacob. now jacob had pitched his tent in the mount: and laban with his brethren pitched in the mount of gilead. 31:26 and laban said to jacob, what hast thou done, that thou hast stolen away unawares to me, and carried away my daughters, as captives taken with the sword? 31:27 wherefore didst thou flee away secretly, and steal away from me; and didst not tell me, that i might have sent thee away with mirth, and with songs, with tabret, and with harp? 31:28 and hast not suffered me to kiss my sons and my daughters? thou hast now done foolishly in so doing. 31:29 it is in the power of my hand to do you hurt: but the god of your father spake unto me yesternight, saying, take thou heed that thou speak not to jacob either good or bad. 31:30 and now, though thou wouldest needs be gone, because thou sore longedst after thy father’s house, yet wherefore hast thou stolen my gods? 31:31 and jacob answered and said to laban, because i was afraid: for i said, peradventure thou wouldest take by force thy daughters from me. 31:32 with whomsoever thou findest thy gods, let him not live: before our brethren discern thou what is thine with me, and take it to thee. for jacob knew not that rachel had stolen them. 31:33 and laban went into jacob’s tent, and into leah’s tent, and into the two maidservants’ tents; but he found them not. then went he out of leah’s tent, and entered into rachel’s tent. 31:34 now rachel had taken the images, and put them in the camel’s furniture, and sat upon them. and laban searched all the tent, but found them not. 31:35 and she said to her father, let it not displease my lord that i cannot rise up before thee; for the custom of women is upon me. and he searched but found not the images. 31:36 and jacob was wroth, and chode with laban: and jacob answered and said to laban, what is my trespass? what is my sin, that thou hast so hotly pursued after me? 31:37 whereas thou hast searched all my stuff, what hast thou found of all thy household stuff? set it here before my brethren and thy brethren, that they may judge betwixt us both. 31:38 this twenty years have i been with thee; thy ewes and thy she goats have not cast their young, and the rams of thy flock have i not eaten. 31:39 that which was torn of beasts i brought not unto thee; i bare the loss of it; of my hand didst thou require it, whether stolen by day, or stolen by night. 31:40 thus i was; in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by night; and my sleep departed from mine eyes. 31:41 thus have i been twenty years in thy house; i served thee fourteen years for thy two daughters, and six years for thy cattle: and thou hast changed my wages ten times. 31:42 except the god of my father, the god of abraham, and the fear of isaac, had been with me, surely thou hadst sent me away now empty. god hath seen mine affliction and the labour of my hands, and rebuked thee yesternight. 31:43 and laban answered and said unto jacob, these daughters are my daughters, and these children are my children, and these cattle are my cattle, and all that thou seest is mine: and what can i do this day unto these my daughters, or unto their children which they have born? 31:44 now therefore come thou, let us make a covenant, i and thou; and let it be for a witness between me and thee. 31:45 and jacob took a stone, and set it up for a pillar. 31:46 and jacob said unto his brethren, gather stones; and they took stones, and made an heap: and they did eat there upon the heap. 31:47 and laban called it jegarsahadutha: but jacob called it galeed. 31:48 and laban said, this heap is a witness between me and thee this day. therefore was the name of it called galeed; 31:49 and mizpah; for he said, the lord watch between me and thee, when we are absent one from another. 31:50 if thou shalt afflict my daughters, or if thou shalt take other wives beside my daughters, no man is with us; see, god is witness betwixt me and thee. 31:51 and laban said to jacob, behold this heap, and behold this pillar, which i have cast betwixt me and thee: 31:52 this heap be witness, and this pillar be witness, that i will not pass over this heap to thee, and that thou shalt not pass over this heap and this pillar unto me, for harm. 31:53 the god of abraham, and the god of nahor, the god of their father, judge betwixt us. and jacob sware by the fear of his father isaac. 31:54 then jacob offered sacrifice upon the mount, and called his brethren to eat bread: and they did eat bread, and tarried all night in the mount. 31:55 and early in the morning laban rose up, and kissed his sons and his daughters, and blessed them: and laban departed, and returned unto his place. 32:1 and jacob went on his way, and the angels of god met him. 32:2 and when jacob saw them, he said, this is god’s host: and he called the name of that place mahanaim. 32:3 and jacob sent messengers before him to esau his brother unto the land of seir, the country of edom. 32:4 and he commanded them, saying, thus shall ye speak unto my lord esau; thy servant jacob saith thus, i have sojourned with laban, and stayed there until now: 32:5 and i have oxen, and asses, flocks, and menservants, and womenservants: and i have sent to tell my lord, that i may find grace in thy sight. 32:6 and the messengers returned to jacob, saying, we came to thy brother esau, and also he cometh to meet thee, and four hundred men with him. 32:7 then jacob was greatly afraid and distressed: and he divided the people that was with him, and the flocks, and herds, and the camels, into two bands; 32:8 and said, if esau come to the one company, and smite it, then the other company which is left shall escape. 32:9 and jacob said, o god of my father abraham, and god of my father isaac, the lord which saidst unto me, return unto thy country, and to thy kindred, and i will deal well with thee: 32:10 i am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth, which thou hast shewed unto thy servant; for with my staff i passed over this jordan; and now i am become two bands. 32:11 deliver me, i pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of esau: for i fear him, lest he will come and smite me, and the mother with the children. 32:12 and thou saidst, i will surely do thee good, and make thy seed as the sand of the sea, which cannot be numbered for multitude. 32:13 and he lodged there that same night; and took of that which came to his hand a present for esau his brother; 32:14 two hundred she goats, and twenty he goats, two hundred ewes, and twenty rams, 32:15 thirty milch camels with their colts, forty kine, and ten bulls, twenty she asses, and ten foals. 32:16 and he delivered them into the hand of his servants, every drove by themselves; and said unto his servants, pass over before me, and put a space betwixt drove and drove. 32:17 and he commanded the foremost, saying, when esau my brother meeteth thee, and asketh thee, saying, whose art thou? and whither goest thou? and whose are these before thee? 32:18 then thou shalt say, they be thy servant jacob’s; it is a present sent unto my lord esau: and, behold, also he is behind us. 32:19 and so commanded he the second, and the third, and all that followed the droves, saying, on this manner shall ye speak unto esau, when ye find him. 32:20 and say ye moreover, behold, thy servant jacob is behind us. for he said, i will appease him with the present that goeth before me, and afterward i will see his face; peradventure he will accept of me. 32:21 so went the present over before him: and himself lodged that night in the company. 32:22 and he rose up that night, and took his two wives, and his two womenservants, and his eleven sons, and passed over the ford jabbok. 32:23 and he took them, and sent them over the brook, and sent over that he had. 32:24 and jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a man with him until the breaking of the day. 32:25 and when he saw that he prevailed not against him, he touched the hollow of his thigh; and the hollow of jacob’s thigh was out of joint, as he wrestled with him. 32:26 and he said, let me go, for the day breaketh. and he said, i will not let thee go, except thou bless me. 32:27 and he said unto him, what is thy name? and he said, jacob. 32:28 and he said, thy name shall be called no more jacob, but israel: for as a prince hast thou power with god and with men, and hast prevailed. 32:29 and jacob asked him, and said, tell me, i pray thee, thy name. and he said, wherefore is it that thou dost ask after my name? and he blessed him there. 32:30 and jacob called the name of the place peniel: for i have seen god face to face, and my life is preserved. 32:31 and as he passed over penuel the sun rose upon him, and he halted upon his thigh. 32:32 therefore the children of israel eat not of the sinew which shrank, which is upon the hollow of the thigh, unto this day: because he touched the hollow of jacob’s thigh in the sinew that shrank. 33:1 and jacob lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, esau came, and with him four hundred men. and he divided the children unto leah, and unto rachel, and unto the two handmaids. 33:2 and he put the handmaids and their children foremost, and leah and her children after, and rachel and joseph hindermost. 33:3 and he passed over before them, and bowed himself to the ground seven times, until he came near to his brother. 33:4 and esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his neck, and kissed him: and they wept. 33:5 and he lifted up his eyes, and saw the women and the children; and said, who are those with thee? and he said, the children which god hath graciously given thy servant. 33:6 then the handmaidens came near, they and their children, and they bowed themselves. 33:7 and leah also with her children came near, and bowed themselves: and after came joseph near and rachel, and they bowed themselves. 33:8 and he said, what meanest thou by all this drove which i met? and he said, these are to find grace in the sight of my lord. 33:9 and esau said, i have enough, my brother; keep that thou hast unto thyself. 33:10 and jacob said, nay, i pray thee, if now i have found grace in thy sight, then receive my present at my hand: for therefore i have seen thy face, as though i had seen the face of god, and thou wast pleased with me. 33:11 take, i pray thee, my blessing that is brought to thee; because god hath dealt graciously with me, and because i have enough. and he urged him, and he took it. 33:12 and he said, let us take our journey, and let us go, and i will go before thee. 33:13 and he said unto him, my lord knoweth that the children are tender, and the flocks and herds with young are with me: and if men should overdrive them one day, all the flock will die. 33:14 let my lord, i pray thee, pass over before his servant: and i will lead on softly, according as the cattle that goeth before me and the children be able to endure, until i come unto my lord unto seir. 33:15 and esau said, let me now leave with thee some of the folk that are with me. and he said, what needeth it? let me find grace in the sight of my lord. 33:16 so esau returned that day on his way unto seir. 33:17 and jacob journeyed to succoth, and built him an house, and made booths for his cattle: therefore the name of the place is called succoth. 33:18 and jacob came to shalem, a city of shechem, which is in the land of canaan, when he came from padanaram; and pitched his tent before the city. 33:19 and he bought a parcel of a field, where he had spread his tent, at the hand of the children of hamor, shechem’s father, for an hundred pieces of money. 33:20 and he erected there an altar, and called it eleloheisrael. 34:1 and dinah the daughter of leah, which she bare unto jacob, went out to see the daughters of the land. 34:2 and when shechem the son of hamor the hivite, prince of the country, saw her, he took her, and lay with her, and defiled her. 34:3 and his soul clave unto dinah the daughter of jacob, and he loved the damsel, and spake kindly unto the damsel. 34:4 and shechem spake unto his father hamor, saying, get me this damsel to wife. 34:5 and jacob heard that he had defiled dinah his daughter: now his sons were with his cattle in the field: and jacob held his peace until they were come. 34:6 and hamor the father of shechem went out unto jacob to commune with him. 34:7 and the sons of jacob came out of the field when they heard it: and the men were grieved, and they were very wroth, because he had wrought folly in israel in lying with jacob’s daughter: which thing ought not to be done. 34:8 and hamor communed with them, saying, the soul of my son shechem longeth for your daughter: i pray you give her him to wife. 34:9 and make ye marriages with us, and give your daughters unto us, and take our daughters unto you. 34:10 and ye shall dwell with us: and the land shall be before you; dwell and trade ye therein, and get you possessions therein. 34:11 and shechem said unto her father and unto her brethren, let me find grace in your eyes, and what ye shall say unto me i will give. 34:12 ask me never so much dowry and gift, and i will give according as ye shall say unto me: but give me the damsel to wife. 34:13 and the sons of jacob answered shechem and hamor his father deceitfully, and said, because he had defiled dinah their sister: 34:14 and they said unto them, we cannot do this thing, to give our sister to one that is uncircumcised; for that were a reproach unto us: 34:15 but in this will we consent unto you: if ye will be as we be, that every male of you be circumcised; 34:16 then will we give our daughters unto you, and we will take your daughters to us, and we will dwell with you, and we will become one people. 34:17 but if ye will not hearken unto us, to be circumcised; then will we take our daughter, and we will be gone. 34:18 and their words pleased hamor, and shechem hamor’s son. 34:19 and the young man deferred not to do the thing, because he had delight in jacob’s daughter: and he was more honourable than all the house of his father. 34:20 and hamor and shechem his son came unto the gate of their city, and communed with the men of their city, saying, 34:21 these men are peaceable with us; therefore let them dwell in the land, and trade therein; for the land, behold, it is large enough for them; let us take their daughters to us for wives, and let us give them our daughters. 34:22 only herein will the men consent unto us for to dwell with us, to be one people, if every male among us be circumcised, as they are circumcised. 34:23 shall not their cattle and their substance and every beast of theirs be ours? only let us consent unto them, and they will dwell with us. 34:24 and unto hamor and unto shechem his son hearkened all that went out of the gate of his city; and every male was circumcised, all that went out of the gate of his city. 34:25 and it came to pass on the third day, when they were sore, that two of the sons of jacob, simeon and levi, dinah’s brethren, took each man his sword, and came upon the city boldly, and slew all the males. 34:26 and they slew hamor and shechem his son with the edge of the sword, and took dinah out of shechem’s house, and went out. 34:27 the sons of jacob came upon the slain, and spoiled the city, because they had defiled their sister. 34:28 they took their sheep, and their oxen, and their asses, and that which was in the city, and that which was in the field, 34:29 and all their wealth, and all their little ones, and their wives took they captive, and spoiled even all that was in the house. 34:30 and jacob said to simeon and levi, ye have troubled me to make me to stink among the inhabitants of the land, among the canaanites and the perizzites: and i being few in number, they shall gather themselves together against me, and slay me; and i shall be destroyed, i and my house. 34:31 and they said, should he deal with our sister as with an harlot? 35:1 and god said unto jacob, arise, go up to bethel, and dwell there: and make there an altar unto god, that appeared unto thee when thou fleddest from the face of esau thy brother. 35:2 then jacob said unto his household, and to all that were with him, put away the strange gods that are among you, and be clean, and change your garments: 35:3 and let us arise, and go up to bethel; and i will make there an altar unto god, who answered me in the day of my distress, and was with me in the way which i went. 35:4 and they gave unto jacob all the strange gods which were in their hand, and all their earrings which were in their ears; and jacob hid them under the oak which was by shechem. 35:5 and they journeyed: and the terror of god was upon the cities that were round about them, and they did not pursue after the sons of jacob. 35:6 so jacob came to luz, which is in the land of canaan, that is, bethel, he and all the people that were with him. 35:7 and he built there an altar, and called the place elbethel: because there god appeared unto him, when he fled from the face of his brother. 35:8 but deborah rebekah’s nurse died, and she was buried beneath bethel under an oak: and the name of it was called allonbachuth. 35:9 and god appeared unto jacob again, when he came out of padanaram, and blessed him. 35:10 and god said unto him, thy name is jacob: thy name shall not be called any more jacob, but israel shall be thy name: and he called his name israel. 35:11 and god said unto him, i am god almighty: be fruitful and multiply; a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee, and kings shall come out of thy loins; 35:12 and the land which i gave abraham and isaac, to thee i will give it, and to thy seed after thee will i give the land. 35:13 and god went up from him in the place where he talked with him. 35:14 and jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with him, even a pillar of stone: and he poured a drink offering thereon, and he poured oil thereon. 35:15 and jacob called the name of the place where god spake with him, bethel. 35:16 and they journeyed from bethel; and there was but a little way to come to ephrath: and rachel travailed, and she had hard labour. 35:17 and it came to pass, when she was in hard labour, that the midwife said unto her, fear not; thou shalt have this son also. 35:18 and it came to pass, as her soul was in departing, (for she died) that she called his name benoni: but his father called him benjamin. 35:19 and rachel died, and was buried in the way to ephrath, which is bethlehem. 35:20 and jacob set a pillar upon her grave: that is the pillar of rachel’s grave unto this day. 35:21 and israel journeyed, and spread his tent beyond the tower of edar. 35:22 and it came to pass, when israel dwelt in that land, that reuben went and lay with bilhah his father’s concubine: and israel heard it. now the sons of jacob were twelve: 35:23 the sons of leah; reuben, jacob’s firstborn, and simeon, and levi, and judah, and issachar, and zebulun: 35:24 the sons of rachel; joseph, and benjamin: 35:25 and the sons of bilhah, rachel’s handmaid; dan, and naphtali: 35:26 and the sons of zilpah, leah’s handmaid: gad, and asher: these are the sons of jacob, which were born to him in padanaram. 35:27 and jacob came unto isaac his father unto mamre, unto the city of arbah, which is hebron, where abraham and isaac sojourned. 35:28 and the days of isaac were an hundred and fourscore years. 35:29 and isaac gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered unto his people, being old and full of days: and his sons esau and jacob buried him. 36:1 now these are the generations of esau, who is edom. 36:2 esau took his wives of the daughters of canaan; adah the daughter of elon the hittite, and aholibamah the daughter of anah the daughter of zibeon the hivite; 36:3 and bashemath ishmael’s daughter, sister of nebajoth. 36:4 and adah bare to esau eliphaz; and bashemath bare reuel; 36:5 and aholibamah bare jeush, and jaalam, and korah: these are the sons of esau, which were born unto him in the land of canaan. 36:6 and esau took his wives, and his sons, and his daughters, and all the persons of his house, and his cattle, and all his beasts, and all his substance, which he had got in the land of canaan; and went into the country from the face of his brother jacob. 36:7 for their riches were more than that they might dwell together; and the land wherein they were strangers could not bear them because of their cattle. 36:8 thus dwelt esau in mount seir: esau is edom. 36:9 and these are the generations of esau the father of the edomites in mount seir: 36:10 these are the names of esau’s sons; eliphaz the son of adah the wife of esau, reuel the son of bashemath the wife of esau. 36:11 and the sons of eliphaz were teman, omar, zepho, and gatam, and kenaz. 36:12 and timna was concubine to eliphaz esau’s son; and she bare to eliphaz amalek: these were the sons of adah esau’s wife. 36:13 and these are the sons of reuel; nahath, and zerah, shammah, and mizzah: these were the sons of bashemath esau’s wife. 36:14 and these were the sons of aholibamah, the daughter of anah the daughter of zibeon, esau’s wife: and she bare to esau jeush, and jaalam, and korah. 36:15 these were dukes of the sons of esau: the sons of eliphaz the firstborn son of esau; duke teman, duke omar, duke zepho, duke kenaz, 36:16 duke korah, duke gatam, and duke amalek: these are the dukes that came of eliphaz in the land of edom; these were the sons of adah. 36:17 and these are the sons of reuel esau’s son; duke nahath, duke zerah, duke shammah, duke mizzah: these are the dukes that came of reuel in the land of edom; these are the sons of bashemath esau’s wife. 36:18 and these are the sons of aholibamah esau’s wife; duke jeush, duke jaalam, duke korah: these were the dukes that came of aholibamah the daughter of anah, esau’s wife. 36:19 these are the sons of esau, who is edom, and these are their dukes. 36:20 these are the sons of seir the horite, who inhabited the land; lotan, and shobal, and zibeon, and anah, 36:21 and dishon, and ezer, and dishan: these are the dukes of the horites, the children of seir in the land of edom. 36:22 and the children of lotan were hori and hemam; and lotan’s sister was timna. 36:23 and the children of shobal were these; alvan, and manahath, and ebal, shepho, and onam. 36:24 and these are the children of zibeon; both ajah, and anah: this was that anah that found the mules in the wilderness, as he fed the asses of zibeon his father. 36:25 and the children of anah were these; dishon, and aholibamah the daughter of anah. 36:26 and these are the children of dishon; hemdan, and eshban, and ithran, and cheran. 36:27 the children of ezer are these; bilhan, and zaavan, and akan. 36:28 the children of dishan are these; uz, and aran. 36:29 these are the dukes that came of the horites; duke lotan, duke shobal, duke zibeon, duke anah, 36:30 duke dishon, duke ezer, duke dishan: these are the dukes that came of hori, among their dukes in the land of seir. 36:31 and these are the kings that reigned in the land of edom, before there reigned any king over the children of israel. 36:32 and bela the son of beor reigned in edom: and the name of his city was dinhabah. 36:33 and bela died, and jobab the son of zerah of bozrah reigned in his stead. 36:34 and jobab died, and husham of the land of temani reigned in his stead. 36:35 and husham died, and hadad the son of bedad, who smote midian in the field of moab, reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was avith. 36:36 and hadad died, and samlah of masrekah reigned in his stead. 36:37 and samlah died, and saul of rehoboth by the river reigned in his stead. 36:38 and saul died, and baalhanan the son of achbor reigned in his stead. 36:39 and baalhanan the son of achbor died, and hadar reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was pau; and his wife’s name was mehetabel, the daughter of matred, the daughter of mezahab. 36:40 and these are the names of the dukes that came of esau, according to their families, after their places, by their names; duke timnah, duke alvah, duke jetheth, 36:41 duke aholibamah, duke elah, duke pinon, 36:42 duke kenaz, duke teman, duke mibzar, 36:43 duke magdiel, duke iram: these be the dukes of edom, according to their habitations in the land of their possession: he is esau the father of the edomites. 37:1 and jacob dwelt in the land wherein his father was a stranger, in the land of canaan. 37:2 these are the generations of jacob. joseph, being seventeen years old, was feeding the flock with his brethren; and the lad was with the sons of bilhah, and with the sons of zilpah, his father’s wives: and joseph brought unto his father their evil report. 37:3 now israel loved joseph more than all his children, because he was the son of his old age: and he made him a coat of many colours. 37:4 and when his brethren saw that their father loved him more than all his brethren, they hated him, and could not speak peaceably unto him. 37:5 and joseph dreamed a dream, and he told it his brethren: and they hated him yet the more. 37:6 and he said unto them, hear, i pray you, this dream which i have dreamed: 37:7 for, behold, we were binding sheaves in the field, and, lo, my sheaf arose, and also stood upright; and, behold, your sheaves stood round about, and made obeisance to my sheaf. 37:8 and his brethren said to him, shalt thou indeed reign over us? or shalt thou indeed have dominion over us? and they hated him yet the more for his dreams, and for his words. 37:9 and he dreamed yet another dream, and told it his brethren, and said, behold, i have dreamed a dream more; and, behold, the sun and the moon and the eleven stars made obeisance to me. 37:10 and he told it to his father, and to his brethren: and his father rebuked him, and said unto him, what is this dream that thou hast dreamed? shall i and thy mother and thy brethren indeed come to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth? 37:11 and his brethren envied him; but his father observed the saying. 37:12 and his brethren went to feed their father’s flock in shechem. 37:13 and israel said unto joseph, do not thy brethren feed the flock in shechem? come, and i will send thee unto them. and he said to him, here am i. 37:14 and he said to him, go, i pray thee, see whether it be well with thy brethren, and well with the flocks; and bring me word again. so he sent him out of the vale of hebron, and he came to shechem. 37:15 and a certain man found him, and, behold, he was wandering in the field: and the man asked him, saying, what seekest thou? 37:16 and he said, i seek my brethren: tell me, i pray thee, where they feed their flocks. 37:17 and the man said, they are departed hence; for i heard them say, let us go to dothan. and joseph went after his brethren, and found them in dothan. 37:18 and when they saw him afar off, even before he came near unto them, they conspired against him to slay him. 37:19 and they said one to another, behold, this dreamer cometh. 37:20 come now therefore, and let us slay him, and cast him into some pit, and we will say, some evil beast hath devoured him: and we shall see what will become of his dreams. 37:21 and reuben heard it, and he delivered him out of their hands; and said, let us not kill him. 37:22 and reuben said unto them, shed no blood, but cast him into this pit that is in the wilderness, and lay no hand upon him; that he might rid him out of their hands, to deliver him to his father again. 37:23 and it came to pass, when joseph was come unto his brethren, that they stript joseph out of his coat, his coat of many colours that was on him; 37:24 and they took him, and cast him into a pit: and the pit was empty, there was no water in it. 37:25 and they sat down to eat bread: and they lifted up their eyes and looked, and, behold, a company of ishmeelites came from gilead with their camels bearing spicery and balm and myrrh, going to carry it down to egypt. 37:26 and judah said unto his brethren, what profit is it if we slay our brother, and conceal his blood? 37:27 come, and let us sell him to the ishmeelites, and let not our hand be upon him; for he is our brother and our flesh. and his brethren were content. 37:28 then there passed by midianites merchantmen; and they drew and lifted up joseph out of the pit, and sold joseph to the ishmeelites for twenty pieces of silver: and they brought joseph into egypt. 37:29 and reuben returned unto the pit; and, behold, joseph was not in the pit; and he rent his clothes. 37:30 and he returned unto his brethren, and said, the child is not; and i, whither shall i go? 37:31 and they took joseph’s coat, and killed a kid of the goats, and dipped the coat in the blood; 37:32 and they sent the coat of many colours, and they brought it to their father; and said, this have we found: know now whether it be thy son’s coat or no. 37:33 and he knew it, and said, it is my son’s coat; an evil beast hath devoured him; joseph is without doubt rent in pieces. 37:34 and jacob rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his son many days. 37:35 and all his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him; but he refused to be comforted; and he said, for i will go down into the grave unto my son mourning. thus his father wept for him. 37:36 and the midianites sold him into egypt unto potiphar, an officer of pharaoh’s, and captain of the guard. 38:1 and it came to pass at that time, that judah went down from his brethren, and turned in to a certain adullamite, whose name was hirah. 38:2 and judah saw there a daughter of a certain canaanite, whose name was shuah; and he took her, and went in unto her. 38:3 and she conceived, and bare a son; and he called his name er. 38:4 and she conceived again, and bare a son; and she called his name onan. 38:5 and she yet again conceived, and bare a son; and called his name shelah: and he was at chezib, when she bare him. 38:6 and judah took a wife for er his firstborn, whose name was tamar. 38:7 and er, judah’s firstborn, was wicked in the sight of the lord; and the lord slew him. 38:8 and judah said unto onan, go in unto thy brother’s wife, and marry her, and raise up seed to thy brother. 38:9 and onan knew that the seed should not be his; and it came to pass, when he went in unto his brother’s wife, that he spilled it on the ground, lest that he should give seed to his brother. 38:10 and the thing which he did displeased the lord: wherefore he slew him also. 38:11 then said judah to tamar his daughter in law, remain a widow at thy father’s house, till shelah my son be grown: for he said, lest peradventure he die also, as his brethren did. and tamar went and dwelt in her father’s house. 38:12 and in process of time the daughter of shuah judah’s wife died; and judah was comforted, and went up unto his sheepshearers to timnath, he and his friend hirah the adullamite. 38:13 and it was told tamar, saying, behold thy father in law goeth up to timnath to shear his sheep. 38:14 and she put her widow’s garments off from her, and covered her with a vail, and wrapped herself, and sat in an open place, which is by the way to timnath; for she saw that shelah was grown, and she was not given unto him to wife. 38:15 when judah saw her, he thought her to be an harlot; because she had covered her face. 38:16 and he turned unto her by the way, and said, go to, i pray thee, let me come in unto thee; (for he knew not that she was his daughter in law.) and she said, what wilt thou give me, that thou mayest come in unto me? 38:17 and he said, i will send thee a kid from the flock. and she said, wilt thou give me a pledge, till thou send it? 38:18 and he said, what pledge shall i give thee? and she said, thy signet, and thy bracelets, and thy staff that is in thine hand. and he gave it her, and came in unto her, and she conceived by him. 38:19 and she arose, and went away, and laid by her vail from her, and put on the garments of her widowhood. 38:20 and judah sent the kid by the hand of his friend the adullamite, to receive his pledge from the woman’s hand: but he found her not. 38:21 then he asked the men of that place, saying, where is the harlot, that was openly by the way side? and they said, there was no harlot in this place. 38:22 and he returned to judah, and said, i cannot find her; and also the men of the place said, that there was no harlot in this place. 38:23 and judah said, let her take it to her, lest we be shamed: behold, i sent this kid, and thou hast not found her. 38:24 and it came to pass about three months after, that it was told judah, saying, tamar thy daughter in law hath played the harlot; and also, behold, she is with child by whoredom. and judah said, bring her forth, and let her be burnt. 38:25 when she was brought forth, she sent to her father in law, saying, by the man, whose these are, am i with child: and she said, discern, i pray thee, whose are these, the signet, and bracelets, and staff. 38:26 and judah acknowledged them, and said, she hath been more righteous than i; because that i gave her not to shelah my son. and he knew her again no more. 38:27 and it came to pass in the time of her travail, that, behold, twins were in her womb. 38:28 and it came to pass, when she travailed, that the one put out his hand: and the midwife took and bound upon his hand a scarlet thread, saying, this came out first. 38:29 and it came to pass, as he drew back his hand, that, behold, his brother came out: and she said, how hast thou broken forth? this breach be upon thee: therefore his name was called pharez. 38:30 and afterward came out his brother, that had the scarlet thread upon his hand: and his name was called zarah. 39:1 and joseph was brought down to egypt; and potiphar, an officer of pharaoh, captain of the guard, an egyptian, bought him of the hands of the ishmeelites, which had brought him down thither. 39:2 and the lord was with joseph, and he was a prosperous man; and he was in the house of his master the egyptian. 39:3 and his master saw that the lord was with him, and that the lord made all that he did to prosper in his hand. 39:4 and joseph found grace in his sight, and he served him: and he made him overseer over his house, and all that he had he put into his hand. 39:5 and it came to pass from the time that he had made him overseer in his house, and over all that he had, that the lord blessed the egyptian’s house for joseph’s sake; and the blessing of the lord was upon all that he had in the house, and in the field. 39:6 and he left all that he had in joseph’s hand; and he knew not ought he had, save the bread which he did eat. and joseph was a goodly person, and well favoured. 39:7 and it came to pass after these things, that his master’s wife cast her eyes upon joseph; and she said, lie with me. 39:8 but he refused, and said unto his master’s wife, behold, my master wotteth not what is with me in the house, and he hath committed all that he hath to my hand; 39:9 there is none greater in this house than i; neither hath he kept back any thing from me but thee, because thou art his wife: how then can i do this great wickedness, and sin against god? 39:10 and it came to pass, as she spake to joseph day by day, that he hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, or to be with her. 39:11 and it came to pass about this time, that joseph went into the house to do his business; and there was none of the men of the house there within. 39:12 and she caught him by his garment, saying, lie with me: and he left his garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out. 39:13 and it came to pass, when she saw that he had left his garment in her hand, and was fled forth, 39:14 that she called unto the men of her house, and spake unto them, saying, see, he hath brought in an hebrew unto us to mock us; he came in unto me to lie with me, and i cried with a loud voice: 39:15 and it came to pass, when he heard that i lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment with me, and fled, and got him out. 39:16 and she laid up his garment by her, until his lord came home. 39:17 and she spake unto him according to these words, saying, the hebrew servant, which thou hast brought unto us, came in unto me to mock me: 39:18 and it came to pass, as i lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment with me, and fled out. 39:19 and it came to pass, when his master heard the words of his wife, which she spake unto him, saying, after this manner did thy servant to me; that his wrath was kindled. 39:20 and joseph’s master took him, and put him into the prison, a place where the king’s prisoners were bound: and he was there in the prison. 39:21 but the lord was with joseph, and shewed him mercy, and gave him favour in the sight of the keeper of the prison. 39:22 and the keeper of the prison committed to joseph’s hand all the prisoners that were in the prison; and whatsoever they did there, he was the doer of it. 39:23 the keeper of the prison looked not to any thing that was under his hand; because the lord was with him, and that which he did, the lord made it to prosper. 40:1 and it came to pass after these things, that the butler of the king of egypt and his baker had offended their lord the king of egypt. 40:2 and pharaoh was wroth against two of his officers, against the chief of the butlers, and against the chief of the bakers. 40:3 and he put them in ward in the house of the captain of the guard, into the prison, the place where joseph was bound. 40:4 and the captain of the guard charged joseph with them, and he served them: and they continued a season in ward. 40:5 and they dreamed a dream both of them, each man his dream in one night, each man according to the interpretation of his dream, the butler and the baker of the king of egypt, which were bound in the prison. 40:6 and joseph came in unto them in the morning, and looked upon them, and, behold, they were sad. 40:7 and he asked pharaoh’s officers that were with him in the ward of his lord’s house, saying, wherefore look ye so sadly to day? 40:8 and they said unto him, we have dreamed a dream, and there is no interpreter of it. and joseph said unto them, do not interpretations belong to god? tell me them, i pray you. 40:9 and the chief butler told his dream to joseph, and said to him, in my dream, behold, a vine was before me; 40:10 and in the vine were three branches: and it was as though it budded, and her blossoms shot forth; and the clusters thereof brought forth ripe grapes: 40:11 and pharaoh’s cup was in my hand: and i took the grapes, and pressed them into pharaoh’s cup, and i gave the cup into pharaoh’s hand. 40:12 and joseph said unto him, this is the interpretation of it: the three branches are three days: 40:13 yet within three days shall pharaoh lift up thine head, and restore thee unto thy place: and thou shalt deliver pharaoh’s cup into his hand, after the former manner when thou wast his butler. 40:14 but think on me when it shall be well with thee, and shew kindness, i pray thee, unto me, and make mention of me unto pharaoh, and bring me out of this house: 40:15 for indeed i was stolen away out of the land of the hebrews: and here also have i done nothing that they should put me into the dungeon. 40:16 when the chief baker saw that the interpretation was good, he said unto joseph, i also was in my dream, and, behold, i had three white baskets on my head: 40:17 and in the uppermost basket there was of all manner of bakemeats for pharaoh; and the birds did eat them out of the basket upon my head. 40:18 and joseph answered and said, this is the interpretation thereof: the three baskets are three days: 40:19 yet within three days shall pharaoh lift up thy head from off thee, and shall hang thee on a tree; and the birds shall eat thy flesh from off thee. 40:20 and it came to pass the third day, which was pharaoh’s birthday, that he made a feast unto all his servants: and he lifted up the head of the chief butler and of the chief baker among his servants. 40:21 and he restored the chief butler unto his butlership again; and he gave the cup into pharaoh’s hand: 40:22 but he hanged the chief baker: as joseph had interpreted to them. 40:23 yet did not the chief butler remember joseph, but forgat him. 41:1 and it came to pass at the end of two full years, that pharaoh dreamed: and, behold, he stood by the river. 41:2 and, behold, there came up out of the river seven well favoured kine and fatfleshed; and they fed in a meadow. 41:3 and, behold, seven other kine came up after them out of the river, ill favoured and leanfleshed; and stood by the other kine upon the brink of the river. 41:4 and the ill favoured and leanfleshed kine did eat up the seven well favoured and fat kine. so pharaoh awoke. 41:5 and he slept and dreamed the second time: and, behold, seven ears of corn came up upon one stalk, rank and good. 41:6 and, behold, seven thin ears and blasted with the east wind sprung up after them. 41:7 and the seven thin ears devoured the seven rank and full ears. and pharaoh awoke, and, behold, it was a dream. 41:8 and it came to pass in the morning that his spirit was troubled; and he sent and called for all the magicians of egypt, and all the wise men thereof: and pharaoh told them his dream; but there was none that could interpret them unto pharaoh. 41:9 then spake the chief butler unto pharaoh, saying, i do remember my faults this day: 41:10 pharaoh was wroth with his servants, and put me in ward in the captain of the guard’s house, both me and the chief baker: 41:11 and we dreamed a dream in one night, i and he; we dreamed each man according to the interpretation of his dream. 41:12 and there was there with us a young man, an hebrew, servant to the captain of the guard; and we told him, and he interpreted to us our dreams; to each man according to his dream he did interpret. 41:13 and it came to pass, as he interpreted to us, so it was; me he restored unto mine office, and him he hanged. 41:14 then pharaoh sent and called joseph, and they brought him hastily out of the dungeon: and he shaved himself, and changed his raiment, and came in unto pharaoh. 41:15 and pharaoh said unto joseph, i have dreamed a dream, and there is none that can interpret it: and i have heard say of thee, that thou canst understand a dream to interpret it. 41:16 and joseph answered pharaoh, saying, it is not in me: god shall give pharaoh an answer of peace. 41:17 and pharaoh said unto joseph, in my dream, behold, i stood upon the bank of the river: 41:18 and, behold, there came up out of the river seven kine, fatfleshed and well favoured; and they fed in a meadow: 41:19 and, behold, seven other kine came up after them, poor and very ill favoured and leanfleshed, such as i never saw in all the land of egypt for badness: 41:20 and the lean and the ill favoured kine did eat up the first seven fat kine: 41:21 and when they had eaten them up, it could not be known that they had eaten them; but they were still ill favoured, as at the beginning. so i awoke. 41:22 and i saw in my dream, and, behold, seven ears came up in one stalk, full and good: 41:23 and, behold, seven ears, withered, thin, and blasted with the east wind, sprung up after them: 41:24 and the thin ears devoured the seven good ears: and i told this unto the magicians; but there was none that could declare it to me. 41:25 and joseph said unto pharaoh, the dream of pharaoh is one: god hath shewed pharaoh what he is about to do. 41:26 the seven good kine are seven years; and the seven good ears are seven years: the dream is one. 41:27 and the seven thin and ill favoured kine that came up after them are seven years; and the seven empty ears blasted with the east wind shall be seven years of famine. 41:28 this is the thing which i have spoken unto pharaoh: what god is about to do he sheweth unto pharaoh. 41:29 behold, there come seven years of great plenty throughout all the land of egypt: 41:30 and there shall arise after them seven years of famine; and all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land of egypt; and the famine shall consume the land; 41:31 and the plenty shall not be known in the land by reason of that famine following; for it shall be very grievous. 41:32 and for that the dream was doubled unto pharaoh twice; it is because the thing is established by god, and god will shortly bring it to pass. 41:33 now therefore let pharaoh look out a man discreet and wise, and set him over the land of egypt. 41:34 let pharaoh do this, and let him appoint officers over the land, and take up the fifth part of the land of egypt in the seven plenteous years. 41:35 and let them gather all the food of those good years that come, and lay up corn under the hand of pharaoh, and let them keep food in the cities. 41:36 and that food shall be for store to the land against the seven years of famine, which shall be in the land of egypt; that the land perish not through the famine. 41:37 and the thing was good in the eyes of pharaoh, and in the eyes of all his servants. 41:38 and pharaoh said unto his servants, can we find such a one as this is, a man in whom the spirit of god is? 41:39 and pharaoh said unto joseph, forasmuch as god hath shewed thee all this, there is none so discreet and wise as thou art: 41:40 thou shalt be over my house, and according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled: only in the throne will i be greater than thou. 41:41 and pharaoh said unto joseph, see, i have set thee over all the land of egypt. 41:42 and pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon joseph’s hand, and arrayed him in vestures of fine linen, and put a gold chain about his neck; 41:43 and he made him to ride in the second chariot which he had; and they cried before him, bow the knee: and he made him ruler over all the land of egypt. 41:44 and pharaoh said unto joseph, i am pharaoh, and without thee shall no man lift up his hand or foot in all the land of egypt. 41:45 and pharaoh called joseph’s name zaphnathpaaneah; and he gave him to wife asenath the daughter of potipherah priest of on. and joseph went out over all the land of egypt. 41:46 and joseph was thirty years old when he stood before pharaoh king of egypt. and joseph went out from the presence of pharaoh, and went throughout all the land of egypt. 41:47 and in the seven plenteous years the earth brought forth by handfuls. 41:48 and he gathered up all the food of the seven years, which were in the land of egypt, and laid up the food in the cities: the food of the field, which was round about every city, laid he up in the same. 41:49 and joseph gathered corn as the sand of the sea, very much, until he left numbering; for it was without number. 41:50 and unto joseph were born two sons before the years of famine came, which asenath the daughter of potipherah priest of on bare unto him. 41:51 and joseph called the name of the firstborn manasseh: for god, said he, hath made me forget all my toil, and all my father’s house. 41:52 and the name of the second called he ephraim: for god hath caused me to be fruitful in the land of my affliction. 41:53 and the seven years of plenteousness, that was in the land of egypt, were ended. 41:54 and the seven years of dearth began to come, according as joseph had said: and the dearth was in all lands; but in all the land of egypt there was bread. 41:55 and when all the land of egypt was famished, the people cried to pharaoh for bread: and pharaoh said unto all the egyptians, go unto joseph; what he saith to you, do. 41:56 and the famine was over all the face of the earth: and joseph opened all the storehouses, and sold unto the egyptians; and the famine waxed sore in the land of egypt. 41:57 and all countries came into egypt to joseph for to buy corn; because that the famine was so sore in all lands. 42:1 now when jacob saw that there was corn in egypt, jacob said unto his sons, why do ye look one upon another? 42:2 and he said, behold, i have heard that there is corn in egypt: get you down thither, and buy for us from thence; that we may live, and not die. 42:3 and joseph’s ten brethren went down to buy corn in egypt. 42:4 but benjamin, joseph’s brother, jacob sent not with his brethren; for he said, lest peradventure mischief befall him. 42:5 and the sons of israel came to buy corn among those that came: for the famine was in the land of canaan. 42:6 and joseph was the governor over the land, and he it was that sold to all the people of the land: and joseph’s brethren came, and bowed down themselves before him with their faces to the earth. 42:7 and joseph saw his brethren, and he knew them, but made himself strange unto them, and spake roughly unto them; and he said unto them, whence come ye? and they said, from the land of canaan to buy food. 42:8 and joseph knew his brethren, but they knew not him. 42:9 and joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed of them, and said unto them, ye are spies; to see the nakedness of the land ye are come. 42:10 and they said unto him, nay, my lord, but to buy food are thy servants come. 42:11 we are all one man’s sons; we are true men, thy servants are no spies. 42:12 and he said unto them, nay, but to see the nakedness of the land ye are come. 42:13 and they said, thy servants are twelve brethren, the sons of one man in the land of canaan; and, behold, the youngest is this day with our father, and one is not. 42:14 and joseph said unto them, that is it that i spake unto you, saying, ye are spies: 42:15 hereby ye shall be proved: by the life of pharaoh ye shall not go forth hence, except your youngest brother come hither. 42:16 send one of you, and let him fetch your brother, and ye shall be kept in prison, that your words may be proved, whether there be any truth in you: or else by the life of pharaoh surely ye are spies. 42:17 and he put them all together into ward three days. 42:18 and joseph said unto them the third day, this do, and live; for i fear god: 42:19 if ye be true men, let one of your brethren be bound in the house of your prison: go ye, carry corn for the famine of your houses: 42:20 but bring your youngest brother unto me; so shall your words be verified, and ye shall not die. and they did so. 42:21 and they said one to another, we are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is this distress come upon us. 42:22 and reuben answered them, saying, spake i not unto you, saying, do not sin against the child; and ye would not hear? therefore, behold, also his blood is required. 42:23 and they knew not that joseph understood them; for he spake unto them by an interpreter. 42:24 and he turned himself about from them, and wept; and returned to them again, and communed with them, and took from them simeon, and bound him before their eyes. 42:25 then joseph commanded to fill their sacks with corn, and to restore every man’s money into his sack, and to give them provision for the way: and thus did he unto them. 42:26 and they laded their asses with the corn, and departed thence. 42:27 and as one of them opened his sack to give his ass provender in the inn, he espied his money; for, behold, it was in his sack’s mouth. 42:28 and he said unto his brethren, my money is restored; and, lo, it is even in my sack: and their heart failed them, and they were afraid, saying one to another, what is this that god hath done unto us? 42:29 and they came unto jacob their father unto the land of canaan, and told him all that befell unto them; saying, 42:30 the man, who is the lord of the land, spake roughly to us, and took us for spies of the country. 42:31 and we said unto him, we are true men; we are no spies: 42:32 we be twelve brethren, sons of our father; one is not, and the youngest is this day with our father in the land of canaan. 42:33 and the man, the lord of the country, said unto us, hereby shall i know that ye are true men; leave one of your brethren here with me, and take food for the famine of your households, and be gone: 42:34 and bring your youngest brother unto me: then shall i know that ye are no spies, but that ye are true men: so will i deliver you your brother, and ye shall traffick in the land. 42:35 and it came to pass as they emptied their sacks, that, behold, every man’s bundle of money was in his sack: and when both they and their father saw the bundles of money, they were afraid. 42:36 and jacob their father said unto them, me have ye bereaved of my children: joseph is not, and simeon is not, and ye will take benjamin away: all these things are against me. 42:37 and reuben spake unto his father, saying, slay my two sons, if i bring him not to thee: deliver him into my hand, and i will bring him to thee again. 42:38 and he said, my son shall not go down with you; for his brother is dead, and he is left alone: if mischief befall him by the way in the which ye go, then shall ye bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave. 43:1 and the famine was sore in the land. 43:2 and it came to pass, when they had eaten up the corn which they had brought out of egypt, their father said unto them, go again, buy us a little food. 43:3 and judah spake unto him, saying, the man did solemnly protest unto us, saying, ye shall not see my face, except your brother be with you. 43:4 if thou wilt send our brother with us, we will go down and buy thee food: 43:5 but if thou wilt not send him, we will not go down: for the man said unto us, ye shall not see my face, except your brother be with you. 43:6 and israel said, wherefore dealt ye so ill with me, as to tell the man whether ye had yet a brother? 43:7 and they said, the man asked us straitly of our state, and of our kindred, saying, is your father yet alive? have ye another brother? and we told him according to the tenor of these words: could we certainly know that he would say, bring your brother down? 43:8 and judah said unto israel his father, send the lad with me, and we will arise and go; that we may live, and not die, both we, and thou, and also our little ones. 43:9 i will be surety for him; of my hand shalt thou require him: if i bring him not unto thee, and set him before thee, then let me bear the blame for ever: 43:10 for except we had lingered, surely now we had returned this second time. 43:11 and their father israel said unto them, if it must be so now, do this; take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels, and carry down the man a present, a little balm, and a little honey, spices, and myrrh, nuts, and almonds: 43:12 and take double money in your hand; and the money that was brought again in the mouth of your sacks, carry it again in your hand; peradventure it was an oversight: 43:13 take also your brother, and arise, go again unto the man: 43:14 and god almighty give you mercy before the man, that he may send away your other brother, and benjamin. if i be bereaved of my children, i am bereaved. 43:15 and the men took that present, and they took double money in their hand and benjamin; and rose up, and went down to egypt, and stood before joseph. 43:16 and when joseph saw benjamin with them, he said to the ruler of his house, bring these men home, and slay, and make ready; for these men shall dine with me at noon. 43:17 and the man did as joseph bade; and the man brought the men into joseph’s house. 43:18 and the men were afraid, because they were brought into joseph’s house; and they said, because of the money that was returned in our sacks at the first time are we brought in; that he may seek occasion against us, and fall upon us, and take us for bondmen, and our asses. 43:19 and they came near to the steward of joseph’s house, and they communed with him at the door of the house, 43:20 and said, o sir, we came indeed down at the first time to buy food: 43:21 and it came to pass, when we came to the inn, that we opened our sacks, and, behold, every man’s money was in the mouth of his sack, our money in full weight: and we have brought it again in our hand. 43:22 and other money have we brought down in our hands to buy food: we cannot tell who put our money in our sacks. 43:23 and he said, peace be to you, fear not: your god, and the god of your father, hath given you treasure in your sacks: i had your money. and he brought simeon out unto them. 43:24 and the man brought the men into joseph’s house, and gave them water, and they washed their feet; and he gave their asses provender. 43:25 and they made ready the present against joseph came at noon: for they heard that they should eat bread there. 43:26 and when joseph came home, they brought him the present which was in their hand into the house, and bowed themselves to him to the earth. 43:27 and he asked them of their welfare, and said, is your father well, the old man of whom ye spake? is he yet alive? 43:28 and they answered, thy servant our father is in good health, he is yet alive. and they bowed down their heads, and made obeisance. 43:29 and he lifted up his eyes, and saw his brother benjamin, his mother’s son, and said, is this your younger brother, of whom ye spake unto me? and he said, god be gracious unto thee, my son. 43:30 and joseph made haste; for his bowels did yearn upon his brother: and he sought where to weep; and he entered into his chamber, and wept there. 43:31 and he washed his face, and went out, and refrained himself, and said, set on bread. 43:32 and they set on for him by himself, and for them by themselves, and for the egyptians, which did eat with him, by themselves: because the egyptians might not eat bread with the hebrews; for that is an abomination unto the egyptians. 43:33 and they sat before him, the firstborn according to his birthright, and the youngest according to his youth: and the men marvelled one at another. 43:34 and he took and sent messes unto them from before him: but benjamin’s mess was five times so much as any of theirs. and they drank, and were merry with him. 44:1 and he commanded the steward of his house, saying, fill the men’s sacks with food, as much as they can carry, and put every man’s money in his sack’s mouth. 44:2 and put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack’s mouth of the youngest, and his corn money. and he did according to the word that joseph had spoken. 44:3 as soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away, they and their asses. 44:4 and when they were gone out of the city, and not yet far off, joseph said unto his steward, up, follow after the men; and when thou dost overtake them, say unto them, wherefore have ye rewarded evil for good? 44:5 is not this it in which my lord drinketh, and whereby indeed he divineth? ye have done evil in so doing. 44:6 and he overtook them, and he spake unto them these same words. 44:7 and they said unto him, wherefore saith my lord these words? god forbid that thy servants should do according to this thing: 44:8 behold, the money, which we found in our sacks’ mouths, we brought again unto thee out of the land of canaan: how then should we steal out of thy lord’s house silver or gold? 44:9 with whomsoever of thy servants it be found, both let him die, and we also will be my lord’s bondmen. 44:10 and he said, now also let it be according unto your words: he with whom it is found shall be my servant; and ye shall be blameless. 44:11 then they speedily took down every man his sack to the ground, and opened every man his sack. 44:12 and he searched, and began at the eldest, and left at the youngest: and the cup was found in benjamin’s sack. 44:13 then they rent their clothes, and laded every man his ass, and returned to the city. 44:14 and judah and his brethren came to joseph’s house; for he was yet there: and they fell before him on the ground. 44:15 and joseph said unto them, what deed is this that ye have done? wot ye not that such a man as i can certainly divine? 44:16 and judah said, what shall we say unto my lord? what shall we speak? or how shall we clear ourselves? god hath found out the iniquity of thy servants: behold, we are my lord’s servants, both we, and he also with whom the cup is found. 44:17 and he said, god forbid that i should do so: but the man in whose hand the cup is found, he shall be my servant; and as for you, get you up in peace unto your father. 44:18 then judah came near unto him, and said, oh my lord, let thy servant, i pray thee, speak a word in my lord’s ears, and let not thine anger burn against thy servant: for thou art even as pharaoh. 44:19 my lord asked his servants, saying, have ye a father, or a brother? 44:20 and we said unto my lord, we have a father, an old man, and a child of his old age, a little one; and his brother is dead, and he alone is left of his mother, and his father loveth him. 44:21 and thou saidst unto thy servants, bring him down unto me, that i may set mine eyes upon him. 44:22 and we said unto my lord, the lad cannot leave his father: for if he should leave his father, his father would die. 44:23 and thou saidst unto thy servants, except your youngest brother come down with you, ye shall see my face no more. 44:24 and it came to pass when we came up unto thy servant my father, we told him the words of my lord. 44:25 and our father said, go again, and buy us a little food. 44:26 and we said, we cannot go down: if our youngest brother be with us, then will we go down: for we may not see the man’s face, except our youngest brother be with us. 44:27 and thy servant my father said unto us, ye know that my wife bare me two sons: 44:28 and the one went out from me, and i said, surely he is torn in pieces; and i saw him not since: 44:29 and if ye take this also from me, and mischief befall him, ye shall bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave. 44:30 now therefore when i come to thy servant my father, and the lad be not with us; seeing that his life is bound up in the lad’s life; 44:31 it shall come to pass, when he seeth that the lad is not with us, that he will die: and thy servants shall bring down the gray hairs of thy servant our father with sorrow to the grave. 44:32 for thy servant became surety for the lad unto my father, saying, if i bring him not unto thee, then i shall bear the blame to my father for ever. 44:33 now therefore, i pray thee, let thy servant abide instead of the lad a bondman to my lord; and let the lad go up with his brethren. 44:34 for how shall i go up to my father, and the lad be not with me? lest peradventure i see the evil that shall come on my father. 45:1 then joseph could not refrain himself before all them that stood by him; and he cried, cause every man to go out from me. and there stood no man with him, while joseph made himself known unto his brethren. 45:2 and he wept aloud: and the egyptians and the house of pharaoh heard. 45:3 and joseph said unto his brethren, i am joseph; doth my father yet live? and his brethren could not answer him; for they were troubled at his presence. 45:4 and joseph said unto his brethren, come near to me, i pray you. and they came near. and he said, i am joseph your brother, whom ye sold into egypt. 45:5 now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye sold me hither: for god did send me before you to preserve life. 45:6 for these two years hath the famine been in the land: and yet there are five years, in the which there shall neither be earing nor harvest. 45:7 and god sent me before you to preserve you a posterity in the earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance. 45:8 so now it was not you that sent me hither, but god: and he hath made me a father to pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and a ruler throughout all the land of egypt. 45:9 haste ye, and go up to my father, and say unto him, thus saith thy son joseph, god hath made me lord of all egypt: come down unto me, tarry not: 45:10 and thou shalt dwell in the land of goshen, and thou shalt be near unto me, thou, and thy children, and thy children’s children, and thy flocks, and thy herds, and all that thou hast: 45:11 and there will i nourish thee; for yet there are five years of famine; lest thou, and thy household, and all that thou hast, come to poverty. 45:12 and, behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother benjamin, that it is my mouth that speaketh unto you. 45:13 and ye shall tell my father of all my glory in egypt, and of all that ye have seen; and ye shall haste and bring down my father hither. 45:14 and he fell upon his brother benjamin’s neck, and wept; and benjamin wept upon his neck. 45:15 moreover he kissed all his brethren, and wept upon them: and after that his brethren talked with him. 45:16 and the fame thereof was heard in pharaoh’s house, saying, joseph’s brethren are come: and it pleased pharaoh well, and his servants. 45:17 and pharaoh said unto joseph, say unto thy brethren, this do ye; lade your beasts, and go, get you unto the land of canaan; 45:18 and take your father and your households, and come unto me: and i will give you the good of the land of egypt, and ye shall eat the fat of the land. 45:19 now thou art commanded, this do ye; take you wagons out of the land of egypt for your little ones, and for your wives, and bring your father, and come. 45:20 also regard not your stuff; for the good of all the land of egypt is yours. 45:21 and the children of israel did so: and joseph gave them wagons, according to the commandment of pharaoh, and gave them provision for the way. 45:22 to all of them he gave each man changes of raiment; but to benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver, and five changes of raiment. 45:23 and to his father he sent after this manner; ten asses laden with the good things of egypt, and ten she asses laden with corn and bread and meat for his father by the way. 45:24 so he sent his brethren away, and they departed: and he said unto them, see that ye fall not out by the way. 45:25 and they went up out of egypt, and came into the land of canaan unto jacob their father, 45:26 and told him, saying, joseph is yet alive, and he is governor over all the land of egypt. and jacob’s heart fainted, for he believed them not. 45:27 and they told him all the words of joseph, which he had said unto them: and when he saw the wagons which joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of jacob their father revived: 45:28 and israel said, it is enough; joseph my son is yet alive: i will go and see him before i die. 46:1 and israel took his journey with all that he had, and came to beersheba, and offered sacrifices unto the god of his father isaac. 46:2 and god spake unto israel in the visions of the night, and said, jacob, jacob. and he said, here am i. 46:3 and he said, i am god, the god of thy father: fear not to go down into egypt; for i will there make of thee a great nation: 46:4 i will go down with thee into egypt; and i will also surely bring thee up again: and joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes. 46:5 and jacob rose up from beersheba: and the sons of israel carried jacob their father, and their little ones, and their wives, in the wagons which pharaoh had sent to carry him. 46:6 and they took their cattle, and their goods, which they had gotten in the land of canaan, and came into egypt, jacob, and all his seed with him: 46:7 his sons, and his sons’ sons with him, his daughters, and his sons’ daughters, and all his seed brought he with him into egypt. 46:8 and these are the names of the children of israel, which came into egypt, jacob and his sons: reuben, jacob’s firstborn. 46:9 and the sons of reuben; hanoch, and phallu, and hezron, and carmi. 46:10 and the sons of simeon; jemuel, and jamin, and ohad, and jachin, and zohar, and shaul the son of a canaanitish woman. 46:11 and the sons of levi; gershon, kohath, and merari. 46:12 and the sons of judah; er, and onan, and shelah, and pharez, and zarah: but er and onan died in the land of canaan. and the sons of pharez were hezron and hamul. 46:13 and the sons of issachar; tola, and phuvah, and job, and shimron. 46:14 and the sons of zebulun; sered, and elon, and jahleel. 46:15 these be the sons of leah, which she bare unto jacob in padanaram, with his daughter dinah: all the souls of his sons and his daughters were thirty and three. 46:16 and the sons of gad; ziphion, and haggi, shuni, and ezbon, eri, and arodi, and areli. 46:17 and the sons of asher; jimnah, and ishuah, and isui, and beriah, and serah their sister: and the sons of beriah; heber, and malchiel. 46:18 these are the sons of zilpah, whom laban gave to leah his daughter, and these she bare unto jacob, even sixteen souls. 46:19 the sons of rachel jacob’s wife; joseph, and benjamin. 46:20 and unto joseph in the land of egypt were born manasseh and ephraim, which asenath the daughter of potipherah priest of on bare unto him. 46:21 and the sons of benjamin were belah, and becher, and ashbel, gera, and naaman, ehi, and rosh, muppim, and huppim, and ard. 46:22 these are the sons of rachel, which were born to jacob: all the souls were fourteen. 46:23 and the sons of dan; hushim. 46:24 and the sons of naphtali; jahzeel, and guni, and jezer, and shillem. 46:25 these are the sons of bilhah, which laban gave unto rachel his daughter, and she bare these unto jacob: all the souls were seven. 46:26 all the souls that came with jacob into egypt, which came out of his loins, besides jacob’s sons’ wives, all the souls were threescore and six; 46:27 and the sons of joseph, which were born him in egypt, were two souls: all the souls of the house of jacob, which came into egypt, were threescore and ten. 46:28 and he sent judah before him unto joseph, to direct his face unto goshen; and they came into the land of goshen. 46:29 and joseph made ready his chariot, and went up to meet israel his father, to goshen, and presented himself unto him; and he fell on his neck, and wept on his neck a good while. 46:30 and israel said unto joseph, now let me die, since i have seen thy face, because thou art yet alive. 46:31 and joseph said unto his brethren, and unto his father’s house, i will go up, and shew pharaoh, and say unto him, my brethren, and my father’s house, which were in the land of canaan, are come unto me; 46:32 and the men are shepherds, for their trade hath been to feed cattle; and they have brought their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have. 46:33 and it shall come to pass, when pharaoh shall call you, and shall say, what is your occupation? 46:34 that ye shall say, thy servants’ trade hath been about cattle from our youth even until now, both we, and also our fathers: that ye may dwell in the land of goshen; for every shepherd is an abomination unto the egyptians. 47:1 then joseph came and told pharaoh, and said, my father and my brethren, and their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have, are come out of the land of canaan; and, behold, they are in the land of goshen. 47:2 and he took some of his brethren, even five men, and presented them unto pharaoh. 47:3 and pharaoh said unto his brethren, what is your occupation? and they said unto pharaoh, thy servants are shepherds, both we, and also our fathers. 47:4 they said morever unto pharaoh, for to sojourn in the land are we come; for thy servants have no pasture for their flocks; for the famine is sore in the land of canaan: now therefore, we pray thee, let thy servants dwell in the land of goshen. 47:5 and pharaoh spake unto joseph, saying, thy father and thy brethren are come unto thee: 47:6 the land of egypt is before thee; in the best of the land make thy father and brethren to dwell; in the land of goshen let them dwell: and if thou knowest any men of activity among them, then make them rulers over my cattle. 47:7 and joseph brought in jacob his father, and set him before pharaoh: and jacob blessed pharaoh. 47:8 and pharaoh said unto jacob, how old art thou? 47:9 and jacob said unto pharaoh, the days of the years of my pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty years: few and evil have the days of the years of my life been, and have not attained unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage. 47:10 and jacob blessed pharaoh, and went out from before pharaoh. 47:11 and joseph placed his father and his brethren, and gave them a possession in the land of egypt, in the best of the land, in the land of rameses, as pharaoh had commanded. 47:12 and joseph nourished his father, and his brethren, and all his father’s household, with bread, according to their families. 47:13 and there was no bread in all the land; for the famine was very sore, so that the land of egypt and all the land of canaan fainted by reason of the famine. 47:14 and joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land of egypt, and in the land of canaan, for the corn which they bought: and joseph brought the money into pharaoh’s house. 47:15 and when money failed in the land of egypt, and in the land of canaan, all the egyptians came unto joseph, and said, give us bread: for why should we die in thy presence? for the money faileth. 47:16 and joseph said, give your cattle; and i will give you for your cattle, if money fail. 47:17 and they brought their cattle unto joseph: and joseph gave them bread in exchange for horses, and for the flocks, and for the cattle of the herds, and for the asses: and he fed them with bread for all their cattle for that year. 47:18 when that year was ended, they came unto him the second year, and said unto him, we will not hide it from my lord, how that our money is spent; my lord also hath our herds of cattle; there is not ought left in the sight of my lord, but our bodies, and our lands: 47:19 wherefore shall we die before thine eyes, both we and our land? buy us and our land for bread, and we and our land will be servants unto pharaoh: and give us seed, that we may live, and not die, that the land be not desolate. 47:20 and joseph bought all the land of egypt for pharaoh; for the egyptians sold every man his field, because the famine prevailed over them: so the land became pharaoh’s. 47:21 and as for the people, he removed them to cities from one end of the borders of egypt even to the other end thereof. 47:22 only the land of the priests bought he not; for the priests had a portion assigned them of pharaoh, and did eat their portion which pharaoh gave them: wherefore they sold not their lands. 47:23 then joseph said unto the people, behold, i have bought you this day and your land for pharaoh: lo, here is seed for you, and ye shall sow the land. 47:24 and it shall come to pass in the increase, that ye shall give the fifth part unto pharaoh, and four parts shall be your own, for seed of the field, and for your food, and for them of your households, and for food for your little ones. 47:25 and they said, thou hast saved our lives: let us find grace in the sight of my lord, and we will be pharaoh’s servants. 47:26 and joseph made it a law over the land of egypt unto this day, that pharaoh should have the fifth part, except the land of the priests only, which became not pharaoh’s. 47:27 and israel dwelt in the land of egypt, in the country of goshen; and they had possessions therein, and grew, and multiplied exceedingly. 47:28 and jacob lived in the land of egypt seventeen years: so the whole age of jacob was an hundred forty and seven years. 47:29 and the time drew nigh that israel must die: and he called his son joseph, and said unto him, if now i have found grace in thy sight, put, i pray thee, thy hand under my thigh, and deal kindly and truly with me; bury me not, i pray thee, in egypt: 47:30 but i will lie with my fathers, and thou shalt carry me out of egypt, and bury me in their buryingplace. and he said, i will do as thou hast said. 47:31 and he said, swear unto me. and he sware unto him. and israel bowed himself upon the bed’s head. 48:1 and it came to pass after these things, that one told joseph, behold, thy father is sick: and he took with him his two sons, manasseh and ephraim. 48:2 and one told jacob, and said, behold, thy son joseph cometh unto thee: and israel strengthened himself, and sat upon the bed. 48:3 and jacob said unto joseph, god almighty appeared unto me at luz in the land of canaan, and blessed me, 48:4 and said unto me, behold, i will make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, and i will make of thee a multitude of people; and will give this land to thy seed after thee for an everlasting possession. 48:5 and now thy two sons, ephraim and manasseh, which were born unto thee in the land of egypt before i came unto thee into egypt, are mine; as reuben and simeon, they shall be mine. 48:6 and thy issue, which thou begettest after them, shall be thine, and shall be called after the name of their brethren in their inheritance. 48:7 and as for me, when i came from padan, rachel died by me in the land of canaan in the way, when yet there was but a little way to come unto ephrath: and i buried her there in the way of ephrath; the same is bethlehem. 48:8 and israel beheld joseph’s sons, and said, who are these? 48:9 and joseph said unto his father, they are my sons, whom god hath given me in this place. and he said, bring them, i pray thee, unto me, and i will bless them. 48:10 now the eyes of israel were dim for age, so that he could not see. and he brought them near unto him; and he kissed them, and embraced them. 48:11 and israel said unto joseph, i had not thought to see thy face: and, lo, god hath shewed me also thy seed. 48:12 and joseph brought them out from between his knees, and he bowed himself with his face to the earth. 48:13 and joseph took them both, ephraim in his right hand toward israel’s left hand, and manasseh in his left hand toward israel’s right hand, and brought them near unto him. 48:14 and israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon ephraim’s head, who was the younger, and his left hand upon manasseh’s head, guiding his hands wittingly; for manasseh was the firstborn. 48:15 and he blessed joseph, and said, god, before whom my fathers abraham and isaac did walk, the god which fed me all my life long unto this day, 48:16 the angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads; and let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers abraham and isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth. 48:17 and when joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the head of ephraim, it displeased him: and he held up his father’s hand, to remove it from ephraim’s head unto manasseh’s head. 48:18 and joseph said unto his father, not so, my father: for this is the firstborn; put thy right hand upon his head. 48:19 and his father refused, and said, i know it, my son, i know it: he also shall become a people, and he also shall be great: but truly his younger brother shall be greater than he, and his seed shall become a multitude of nations. 48:20 and he blessed them that day, saying, in thee shall israel bless, saying, god make thee as ephraim and as manasseh: and he set ephraim before manasseh. 48:21 and israel said unto joseph, behold, i die: but god shall be with you, and bring you again unto the land of your fathers. 48:22 moreover i have given to thee one portion above thy brethren, which i took out of the hand of the amorite with my sword and with my bow. 49:1 and jacob called unto his sons, and said, gather yourselves together, that i may tell you that which shall befall you in the last days. 49:2 gather yourselves together, and hear, ye sons of jacob; and hearken unto israel your father. 49:3 reuben, thou art my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power: 49:4 unstable as water, thou shalt not excel; because thou wentest up to thy father’s bed; then defiledst thou it: he went up to my couch. 49:5 simeon and levi are brethren; instruments of cruelty are in their habitations. 49:6 o my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine honour, be not thou united: for in their anger they slew a man, and in their selfwill they digged down a wall. 49:7 cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel: i will divide them in jacob, and scatter them in israel. 49:8 judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise: thy hand shall be in the neck of thine enemies; thy father’s children shall bow down before thee. 49:9 judah is a lion’s whelp: from the prey, my son, thou art gone up: he stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as an old lion; who shall rouse him up? 49:10 the sceptre shall not depart from judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until shiloh come; and unto him shall the gathering of the people be. 49:11 binding his foal unto the vine, and his ass’s colt unto the choice vine; he washed his garments in wine, and his clothes in the blood of grapes: 49:12 his eyes shall be red with wine, and his teeth white with milk. 49:13 zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea; and he shall be for an haven of ships; and his border shall be unto zidon. 49:14 issachar is a strong ass couching down between two burdens: 49:15 and he saw that rest was good, and the land that it was pleasant; and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant unto tribute. 49:16 dan shall judge his people, as one of the tribes of israel. 49:17 dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path, that biteth the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward. 49:18 i have waited for thy salvation, o lord. 49:19 gad, a troop shall overcome him: but he shall overcome at the last. 49:20 out of asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal dainties. 49:21 naphtali is a hind let loose: he giveth goodly words. 49:22 joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well; whose branches run over the wall: 49:23 the archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him: 49:24 but his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty god of jacob; (from thence is the shepherd, the stone of israel:) 49:25 even by the god of thy father, who shall help thee; and by the almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lieth under, blessings of the breasts, and of the womb: 49:26 the blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of joseph, and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren. 49:27 benjamin shall ravin as a wolf: in the morning he shall devour the prey, and at night he shall divide the spoil. 49:28 all these are the twelve tribes of israel: and this is it that their father spake unto them, and blessed them; every one according to his blessing he blessed them. 49:29 and he charged them, and said unto them, i am to be gathered unto my people: bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the field of ephron the hittite, 49:30 in the cave that is in the field of machpelah, which is before mamre, in the land of canaan, which abraham bought with the field of ephron the hittite for a possession of a buryingplace. 49:31 there they buried abraham and sarah his wife; there they buried isaac and rebekah his wife; and there i buried leah. 49:32 the purchase of the field and of the cave that is therein was from the children of heth. 49:33 and when jacob had made an end of commanding his sons, he gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was gathered unto his people. 50:1 and joseph fell upon his father’s face, and wept upon him, and kissed him. 50:2 and joseph commanded his servants the physicians to embalm his father: and the physicians embalmed israel. 50:3 and forty days were fulfilled for him; for so are fulfilled the days of those which are embalmed: and the egyptians mourned for him threescore and ten days. 50:4 and when the days of his mourning were past, joseph spake unto the house of pharaoh, saying, if now i have found grace in your eyes, speak, i pray you, in the ears of pharaoh, saying, 50:5 my father made me swear, saying, lo, i die: in my grave which i have digged for me in the land of canaan, there shalt thou bury me. now therefore let me go up, i pray thee, and bury my father, and i will come again. 50:6 and pharaoh said, go up, and bury thy father, according as he made thee swear. 50:7 and joseph went up to bury his father: and with him went up all the servants of pharaoh, the elders of his house, and all the elders of the land of egypt, 50:8 and all the house of joseph, and his brethren, and his father’s house: only their little ones, and their flocks, and their herds, they left in the land of goshen. 50:9 and there went up with him both chariots and horsemen: and it was a very great company. 50:10 and they came to the threshingfloor of atad, which is beyond jordan, and there they mourned with a great and very sore lamentation: and he made a mourning for his father seven days. 50:11 and when the inhabitants of the land, the canaanites, saw the mourning in the floor of atad, they said, this is a grievous mourning to the egyptians: wherefore the name of it was called abelmizraim, which is beyond jordan. 50:12 and his sons did unto him according as he commanded them: 50:13 for his sons carried him into the land of canaan, and buried him in the cave of the field of machpelah, which abraham bought with the field for a possession of a buryingplace of ephron the hittite, before mamre. 50:14 and joseph returned into egypt, he, and his brethren, and all that went up with him to bury his father, after he had buried his father. 50:15 and when joseph’s brethren saw that their father was dead, they said, joseph will peradventure hate us, and will certainly requite us all the evil which we did unto him. 50:16 and they sent a messenger unto joseph, saying, thy father did command before he died, saying, 50:17 so shall ye say unto joseph, forgive, i pray thee now, the trespass of thy brethren, and their sin; for they did unto thee evil: and now, we pray thee, forgive the trespass of the servants of the god of thy father. and joseph wept when they spake unto him. 50:18 and his brethren also went and fell down before his face; and they said, behold, we be thy servants. 50:19 and joseph said unto them, fear not: for am i in the place of god? 50:20 but as for you, ye thought evil against me; but god meant it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people alive. 50:21 now therefore fear ye not: i will nourish you, and your little ones. and he comforted them, and spake kindly unto them. 50:22 and joseph dwelt in egypt, he, and his father’s house: and joseph lived an hundred and ten years. 50:23 and joseph saw ephraim’s children of the third generation: the children also of machir the son of manasseh were brought up upon joseph’s knees. 50:24 and joseph said unto his brethren, i die: and god will surely visit you, and bring you out of this land unto the land which he sware to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob. 50:25 and joseph took an oath of the children of israel, saying, god will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from hence. 50:26 so joseph died, being an hundred and ten years old: and they embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in egypt. the second book of moses: called exodus 1:1 now these are the names of the children of israel, which came into egypt; every man and his household came with jacob. 1:2 reuben, simeon, levi, and judah, 1:3 issachar, zebulun, and benjamin, 1:4 dan, and naphtali, gad, and asher. 1:5 and all the souls that came out of the loins of jacob were seventy souls: for joseph was in egypt already. 1:6 and joseph died, and all his brethren, and all that generation. 1:7 and the children of israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty; and the land was filled with them. 1:8 now there arose up a new king over egypt, which knew not joseph. 1:9 and he said unto his people, behold, the people of the children of israel are more and mightier than we: 1:10 come on, let us deal wisely with them; lest they multiply, and it come to pass, that, when there falleth out any war, they join also unto our enemies, and fight against us, and so get them up out of the land. 1:11 therefore they did set over them taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens. and they built for pharaoh treasure cities, pithom and raamses. 1:12 but the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and grew. and they were grieved because of the children of israel. 1:13 and the egyptians made the children of israel to serve with rigour: 1:14 and they made their lives bitter with hard bondage, in morter, and in brick, and in all manner of service in the field: all their service, wherein they made them serve, was with rigour. 1:15 and the king of egypt spake to the hebrew midwives, of which the name of the one was shiphrah, and the name of the other puah: 1:16 and he said, when ye do the office of a midwife to the hebrew women, and see them upon the stools; if it be a son, then ye shall kill him: but if it be a daughter, then she shall live. 1:17 but the midwives feared god, and did not as the king of egypt commanded them, but saved the men children alive. 1:18 and the king of egypt called for the midwives, and said unto them, why have ye done this thing, and have saved the men children alive? 1:19 and the midwives said unto pharaoh, because the hebrew women are not as the egyptian women; for they are lively, and are delivered ere the midwives come in unto them. 1:20 therefore god dealt well with the midwives: and the people multiplied, and waxed very mighty. 1:21 and it came to pass, because the midwives feared god, that he made them houses. 1:22 and pharaoh charged all his people, saying, every son that is born ye shall cast into the river, and every daughter ye shall save alive. 2:1 and there went a man of the house of levi, and took to wife a daughter of levi. 2:2 and the woman conceived, and bare a son: and when she saw him that he was a goodly child, she hid him three months. 2:3 and when she could not longer hide him, she took for him an ark of bulrushes, and daubed it with slime and with pitch, and put the child therein; and she laid it in the flags by the river’s brink. 2:4 and his sister stood afar off, to wit what would be done to him. 2:5 and the daughter of pharaoh came down to wash herself at the river; and her maidens walked along by the river’s side; and when she saw the ark among the flags, she sent her maid to fetch it. 2:6 and when she had opened it, she saw the child: and, behold, the babe wept. and she had compassion on him, and said, this is one of the hebrews’ children. 2:7 then said his sister to pharaoh’s daughter, shall i go and call to thee a nurse of the hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for thee? 2:8 and pharaoh’s daughter said to her, go. and the maid went and called the child’s mother. 2:9 and pharaoh’s daughter said unto her, take this child away, and nurse it for me, and i will give thee thy wages. and the woman took the child, and nursed it. 2:10 and the child grew, and she brought him unto pharaoh’s daughter, and he became her son. and she called his name moses: and she said, because i drew him out of the water. 2:11 and it came to pass in those days, when moses was grown, that he went out unto his brethren, and looked on their burdens: and he spied an egyptian smiting an hebrew, one of his brethren. 2:12 and he looked this way and that way, and when he saw that there was no man, he slew the egyptian, and hid him in the sand. 2:13 and when he went out the second day, behold, two men of the hebrews strove together: and he said to him that did the wrong, wherefore smitest thou thy fellow? 2:14 and he said, who made thee a prince and a judge over us? intendest thou to kill me, as thou killedst the egyptian? and moses feared, and said, surely this thing is known. 2:15 now when pharaoh heard this thing, he sought to slay moses. but moses fled from the face of pharaoh, and dwelt in the land of midian: and he sat down by a well. 2:16 now the priest of midian had seven daughters: and they came and drew water, and filled the troughs to water their father’s flock. 2:17 and the shepherds came and drove them away: but moses stood up and helped them, and watered their flock. 2:18 and when they came to reuel their father, he said, how is it that ye are come so soon to day? 2:19 and they said, an egyptian delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds, and also drew water enough for us, and watered the flock. 2:20 and he said unto his daughters, and where is he? why is it that ye have left the man? call him, that he may eat bread. 2:21 and moses was content to dwell with the man: and he gave moses zipporah his daughter. 2:22 and she bare him a son, and he called his name gershom: for he said, i have been a stranger in a strange land. 2:23 and it came to pass in process of time, that the king of egypt died: and the children of israel sighed by reason of the bondage, and they cried, and their cry came up unto god by reason of the bondage. 2:24 and god heard their groaning, and god remembered his covenant with abraham, with isaac, and with jacob. 2:25 and god looked upon the children of israel, and god had respect unto them. 3:1 now moses kept the flock of jethro his father in law, the priest of midian: and he led the flock to the backside of the desert, and came to the mountain of god, even to horeb. 3:2 and the angel of the lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed. 3:3 and moses said, i will now turn aside, and see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt. 3:4 and when the lord saw that he turned aside to see, god called unto him out of the midst of the bush, and said, moses, moses. and he said, here am i. 3:5 and he said, draw not nigh hither: put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground. 3:6 moreover he said, i am the god of thy father, the god of abraham, the god of isaac, and the god of jacob. and moses hid his face; for he was afraid to look upon god. 3:7 and the lord said, i have surely seen the affliction of my people which are in egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their taskmasters; for i know their sorrows; 3:8 and i am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the egyptians, and to bring them up out of that land unto a good land and a large, unto a land flowing with milk and honey; unto the place of the canaanites, and the hittites, and the amorites, and the perizzites, and the hivites, and the jebusites. 3:9 now therefore, behold, the cry of the children of israel is come unto me: and i have also seen the oppression wherewith the egyptians oppress them. 3:10 come now therefore, and i will send thee unto pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth my people the children of israel out of egypt. 3:11 and moses said unto god, who am i, that i should go unto pharaoh, and that i should bring forth the children of israel out of egypt? 3:12 and he said, certainly i will be with thee; and this shall be a token unto thee, that i have sent thee: when thou hast brought forth the people out of egypt, ye shall serve god upon this mountain. 3:13 and moses said unto god, behold, when i come unto the children of israel, and shall say unto them, the god of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, what is his name? what shall i say unto them? 3:14 and god said unto moses, i am that i am: and he said, thus shalt thou say unto the children of israel, i am hath sent me unto you. 3:15 and god said moreover unto moses, thus shalt thou say unto the children of israel, the lord god of your fathers, the god of abraham, the god of isaac, and the god of jacob, hath sent me unto you: this is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations. 3:16 go, and gather the elders of israel together, and say unto them, the lord god of your fathers, the god of abraham, of isaac, and of jacob, appeared unto me, saying, i have surely visited you, and seen that which is done to you in egypt: 3:17 and i have said, i will bring you up out of the affliction of egypt unto the land of the canaanites, and the hittites, and the amorites, and the perizzites, and the hivites, and the jebusites, unto a land flowing with milk and honey. 3:18 and they shall hearken to thy voice: and thou shalt come, thou and the elders of israel, unto the king of egypt, and ye shall say unto him, the lord god of the hebrews hath met with us: and now let us go, we beseech thee, three days’ journey into the wilderness, that we may sacrifice to the lord our god. 3:19 and i am sure that the king of egypt will not let you go, no, not by a mighty hand. 3:20 and i will stretch out my hand, and smite egypt with all my wonders which i will do in the midst thereof: and after that he will let you go. 3:21 and i will give this people favour in the sight of the egyptians: and it shall come to pass, that, when ye go, ye shall not go empty. 3:22 but every woman shall borrow of her neighbour, and of her that sojourneth in her house, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment: and ye shall put them upon your sons, and upon your daughters; and ye shall spoil the egyptians. 4:1 and moses answered and said, but, behold, they will not believe me, nor hearken unto my voice: for they will say, the lord hath not appeared unto thee. 4:2 and the lord said unto him, what is that in thine hand? and he said, a rod. 4:3 and he said, cast it on the ground. and he cast it on the ground, and it became a serpent; and moses fled from before it. 4:4 and the lord said unto moses, put forth thine hand, and take it by the tail. and he put forth his hand, and caught it, and it became a rod in his hand: 4:5 that they may believe that the lord god of their fathers, the god of abraham, the god of isaac, and the god of jacob, hath appeared unto thee. 4:6 and the lord said furthermore unto him, put now thine hand into thy bosom. and he put his hand into his bosom: and when he took it out, behold, his hand was leprous as snow. 4:7 and he said, put thine hand into thy bosom again. and he put his hand into his bosom again; and plucked it out of his bosom, and, behold, it was turned again as his other flesh. 4:8 and it shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, neither hearken to the voice of the first sign, that they will believe the voice of the latter sign. 4:9 and it shall come to pass, if they will not believe also these two signs, neither hearken unto thy voice, that thou shalt take of the water of the river, and pour it upon the dry land: and the water which thou takest out of the river shall become blood upon the dry land. 4:10 and moses said unto the lord, o my lord, i am not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou hast spoken unto thy servant: but i am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue. 4:11 and the lord said unto him, who hath made man’s mouth? or who maketh the dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or the blind? have not i the lord? 4:12 now therefore go, and i will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shalt say. 4:13 and he said, o my lord, send, i pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou wilt send. 4:14 and the anger of the lord was kindled against moses, and he said, is not aaron the levite thy brother? i know that he can speak well. and also, behold, he cometh forth to meet thee: and when he seeth thee, he will be glad in his heart. 4:15 and thou shalt speak unto him, and put words in his mouth: and i will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye shall do. 4:16 and he shall be thy spokesman unto the people: and he shall be, even he shall be to thee instead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him instead of god. 4:17 and thou shalt take this rod in thine hand, wherewith thou shalt do signs. 4:18 and moses went and returned to jethro his father in law, and said unto him, let me go, i pray thee, and return unto my brethren which are in egypt, and see whether they be yet alive. and jethro said to moses, go in peace. 4:19 and the lord said unto moses in midian, go, return into egypt: for all the men are dead which sought thy life. 4:20 and moses took his wife and his sons, and set them upon an ass, and he returned to the land of egypt: and moses took the rod of god in his hand. 4:21 and the lord said unto moses, when thou goest to return into egypt, see that thou do all those wonders before pharaoh, which i have put in thine hand: but i will harden his heart, that he shall not let the people go. 4:22 and thou shalt say unto pharaoh, thus saith the lord, israel is my son, even my firstborn: 4:23 and i say unto thee, let my son go, that he may serve me: and if thou refuse to let him go, behold, i will slay thy son, even thy firstborn. 4:24 and it came to pass by the way in the inn, that the lord met him, and sought to kill him. 4:25 then zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her son, and cast it at his feet, and said, surely a bloody husband art thou to me. 4:26 so he let him go: then she said, a bloody husband thou art, because of the circumcision. 4:27 and the lord said to aaron, go into the wilderness to meet moses. and he went, and met him in the mount of god, and kissed him. 4:28 and moses told aaron all the words of the lord who had sent him, and all the signs which he had commanded him. 4:29 and moses and aaron went and gathered together all the elders of the children of israel: 4:30 and aaron spake all the words which the lord had spoken unto moses, and did the signs in the sight of the people. 4:31 and the people believed: and when they heard that the lord had visited the children of israel, and that he had looked upon their affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped. 5:1 and afterward moses and aaron went in, and told pharaoh, thus saith the lord god of israel, let my people go, that they may hold a feast unto me in the wilderness. 5:2 and pharaoh said, who is the lord, that i should obey his voice to let israel go? i know not the lord, neither will i let israel go. 5:3 and they said, the god of the hebrews hath met with us: let us go, we pray thee, three days’ journey into the desert, and sacrifice unto the lord our god; lest he fall upon us with pestilence, or with the sword. 5:4 and the king of egypt said unto them, wherefore do ye, moses and aaron, let the people from their works? get you unto your burdens. 5:5 and pharaoh said, behold, the people of the land now are many, and ye make them rest from their burdens. 5:6 and pharaoh commanded the same day the taskmasters of the people, and their officers, saying, 5:7 ye shall no more give the people straw to make brick, as heretofore: let them go and gather straw for themselves. 5:8 and the tale of the bricks, which they did make heretofore, ye shall lay upon them; ye shall not diminish ought thereof: for they be idle; therefore they cry, saying, let us go and sacrifice to our god. 5:9 let there more work be laid upon the men, that they may labour therein; and let them not regard vain words. 5:10 and the taskmasters of the people went out, and their officers, and they spake to the people, saying, thus saith pharaoh, i will not give you straw. 5:11 go ye, get you straw where ye can find it: yet not ought of your work shall be diminished. 5:12 so the people were scattered abroad throughout all the land of egypt to gather stubble instead of straw. 5:13 and the taskmasters hasted them, saying, fulfil your works, your daily tasks, as when there was straw. 5:14 and the officers of the children of israel, which pharaoh’s taskmasters had set over them, were beaten, and demanded, wherefore have ye not fulfilled your task in making brick both yesterday and to day, as heretofore? 5:15 then the officers of the children of israel came and cried unto pharaoh, saying, wherefore dealest thou thus with thy servants? 5:16 there is no straw given unto thy servants, and they say to us, make brick: and, behold, thy servants are beaten; but the fault is in thine own people. 5:17 but he said, ye are idle, ye are idle: therefore ye say, let us go and do sacrifice to the lord. 5:18 go therefore now, and work; for there shall no straw be given you, yet shall ye deliver the tale of bricks. 5:19 and the officers of the children of israel did see that they were in evil case, after it was said, ye shall not minish ought from your bricks of your daily task. 5:20 and they met moses and aaron, who stood in the way, as they came forth from pharaoh: 5:21 and they said unto them, the lord look upon you, and judge; because ye have made our savour to be abhorred in the eyes of pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword in their hand to slay us. 5:22 and moses returned unto the lord, and said, lord, wherefore hast thou so evil entreated this people? why is it that thou hast sent me? 5:23 for since i came to pharaoh to speak in thy name, he hath done evil to this people; neither hast thou delivered thy people at all. 6:1 then the lord said unto moses, now shalt thou see what i will do to pharaoh: for with a strong hand shall he let them go, and with a strong hand shall he drive them out of his land. 6:2 and god spake unto moses, and said unto him, i am the lord: 6:3 and i appeared unto abraham, unto isaac, and unto jacob, by the name of god almighty, but by my name jehovah was i not known to them. 6:4 and i have also established my covenant with them, to give them the land of canaan, the land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were strangers. 6:5 and i have also heard the groaning of the children of israel, whom the egyptians keep in bondage; and i have remembered my covenant. 6:6 wherefore say unto the children of israel, i am the lord, and i will bring you out from under the burdens of the egyptians, and i will rid you out of their bondage, and i will redeem you with a stretched out arm, and with great judgments: 6:7 and i will take you to me for a people, and i will be to you a god: and ye shall know that i am the lord your god, which bringeth you out from under the burdens of the egyptians. 6:8 and i will bring you in unto the land, concerning the which i did swear to give it to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob; and i will give it you for an heritage: i am the lord. 6:9 and moses spake so unto the children of israel: but they hearkened not unto moses for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage. 6:10 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:11 go in, speak unto pharaoh king of egypt, that he let the children of israel go out of his land. 6:12 and moses spake before the lord, saying, behold, the children of israel have not hearkened unto me; how then shall pharaoh hear me, who am of uncircumcised lips? 6:13 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, and gave them a charge unto the children of israel, and unto pharaoh king of egypt, to bring the children of israel out of the land of egypt. 6:14 these be the heads of their fathers’ houses: the sons of reuben the firstborn of israel; hanoch, and pallu, hezron, and carmi: these be the families of reuben. 6:15 and the sons of simeon; jemuel, and jamin, and ohad, and jachin, and zohar, and shaul the son of a canaanitish woman: these are the families of simeon. 6:16 and these are the names of the sons of levi according to their generations; gershon, and kohath, and merari: and the years of the life of levi were an hundred thirty and seven years. 6:17 the sons of gershon; libni, and shimi, according to their families. 6:18 and the sons of kohath; amram, and izhar, and hebron, and uzziel: and the years of the life of kohath were an hundred thirty and three years. 6:19 and the sons of merari; mahali and mushi: these are the families of levi according to their generations. 6:20 and amram took him jochebed his father’s sister to wife; and she bare him aaron and moses: and the years of the life of amram were an hundred and thirty and seven years. 6:21 and the sons of izhar; korah, and nepheg, and zichri. 6:22 and the sons of uzziel; mishael, and elzaphan, and zithri. 6:23 and aaron took him elisheba, daughter of amminadab, sister of naashon, to wife; and she bare him nadab, and abihu, eleazar, and ithamar. 6:24 and the sons of korah; assir, and elkanah, and abiasaph: these are the families of the korhites. 6:25 and eleazar aaron’s son took him one of the daughters of putiel to wife; and she bare him phinehas: these are the heads of the fathers of the levites according to their families. 6:26 these are that aaron and moses, to whom the lord said, bring out the children of israel from the land of egypt according to their armies. 6:27 these are they which spake to pharaoh king of egypt, to bring out the children of israel from egypt: these are that moses and aaron. 6:28 and it came to pass on the day when the lord spake unto moses in the land of egypt, 6:29 that the lord spake unto moses, saying, i am the lord: speak thou unto pharaoh king of egypt all that i say unto thee. 6:30 and moses said before the lord, behold, i am of uncircumcised lips, and how shall pharaoh hearken unto me? 7:1 and the lord said unto moses, see, i have made thee a god to pharaoh: and aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet. 7:2 thou shalt speak all that i command thee: and aaron thy brother shall speak unto pharaoh, that he send the children of israel out of his land. 7:3 and i will harden pharaoh’s heart, and multiply my signs and my wonders in the land of egypt. 7:4 but pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, that i may lay my hand upon egypt, and bring forth mine armies, and my people the children of israel, out of the land of egypt by great judgments. 7:5 and the egyptians shall know that i am the lord, when i stretch forth mine hand upon egypt, and bring out the children of israel from among them. 7:6 and moses and aaron did as the lord commanded them, so did they. 7:7 and moses was fourscore years old, and aaron fourscore and three years old, when they spake unto pharaoh. 7:8 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, saying, 7:9 when pharaoh shall speak unto you, saying, shew a miracle for you: then thou shalt say unto aaron, take thy rod, and cast it before pharaoh, and it shall become a serpent. 7:10 and moses and aaron went in unto pharaoh, and they did so as the lord had commanded: and aaron cast down his rod before pharaoh, and before his servants, and it became a serpent. 7:11 then pharaoh also called the wise men and the sorcerers: now the magicians of egypt, they also did in like manner with their enchantments. 7:12 for they cast down every man his rod, and they became serpents: but aaron’s rod swallowed up their rods. 7:13 and he hardened pharaoh’s heart, that he hearkened not unto them; as the lord had said. 7:14 and the lord said unto moses, pharaoh’s heart is hardened, he refuseth to let the people go. 7:15 get thee unto pharaoh in the morning; lo, he goeth out unto the water; and thou shalt stand by the river’s brink against he come; and the rod which was turned to a serpent shalt thou take in thine hand. 7:16 and thou shalt say unto him, the lord god of the hebrews hath sent me unto thee, saying, let my people go, that they may serve me in the wilderness: and, behold, hitherto thou wouldest not hear. 7:17 thus saith the lord, in this thou shalt know that i am the lord: behold, i will smite with the rod that is in mine hand upon the waters which are in the river, and they shall be turned to blood. 7:18 and the fish that is in the river shall die, and the river shall stink; and the egyptians shall lothe to drink of the water of the river. 7:19 and the lord spake unto moses, say unto aaron, take thy rod, and stretch out thine hand upon the waters of egypt, upon their streams, upon their rivers, and upon their ponds, and upon all their pools of water, that they may become blood; and that there may be blood throughout all the land of egypt, both in vessels of wood, and in vessels of stone. 7:20 and moses and aaron did so, as the lord commanded; and he lifted up the rod, and smote the waters that were in the river, in the sight of pharaoh, and in the sight of his servants; and all the waters that were in the river were turned to blood. 7:21 and the fish that was in the river died; and the river stank, and the egyptians could not drink of the water of the river; and there was blood throughout all the land of egypt. 7:22 and the magicians of egypt did so with their enchantments: and pharaoh’s heart was hardened, neither did he hearken unto them; as the lord had said. 7:23 and pharaoh turned and went into his house, neither did he set his heart to this also. 7:24 and all the egyptians digged round about the river for water to drink; for they could not drink of the water of the river. 7:25 and seven days were fulfilled, after that the lord had smitten the river. 8:1 and the lord spake unto moses, go unto pharaoh, and say unto him, thus saith the lord, let my people go, that they may serve me. 8:2 and if thou refuse to let them go, behold, i will smite all thy borders with frogs: 8:3 and the river shall bring forth frogs abundantly, which shall go up and come into thine house, and into thy bedchamber, and upon thy bed, and into the house of thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thine ovens, and into thy kneadingtroughs: 8:4 and the frogs shall come up both on thee, and upon thy people, and upon all thy servants. 8:5 and the lord spake unto moses, say unto aaron, stretch forth thine hand with thy rod over the streams, over the rivers, and over the ponds, and cause frogs to come up upon the land of egypt. 8:6 and aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of egypt; and the frogs came up, and covered the land of egypt. 8:7 and the magicians did so with their enchantments, and brought up frogs upon the land of egypt. 8:8 then pharaoh called for moses and aaron, and said, intreat the lord, that he may take away the frogs from me, and from my people; and i will let the people go, that they may do sacrifice unto the lord. 8:9 and moses said unto pharaoh, glory over me: when shall i intreat for thee, and for thy servants, and for thy people, to destroy the frogs from thee and thy houses, that they may remain in the river only? 8:10 and he said, to morrow. and he said, be it according to thy word: that thou mayest know that there is none like unto the lord our god. 8:11 and the frogs shall depart from thee, and from thy houses, and from thy servants, and from thy people; they shall remain in the river only. 8:12 and moses and aaron went out from pharaoh: and moses cried unto the lord because of the frogs which he had brought against pharaoh. 8:13 and the lord did according to the word of moses; and the frogs died out of the houses, out of the villages, and out of the fields. 8:14 and they gathered them together upon heaps: and the land stank. 8:15 but when pharaoh saw that there was respite, he hardened his heart, and hearkened not unto them; as the lord had said. 8:16 and the lord said unto moses, say unto aaron, stretch out thy rod, and smite the dust of the land, that it may become lice throughout all the land of egypt. 8:17 and they did so; for aaron stretched out his hand with his rod, and smote the dust of the earth, and it became lice in man, and in beast; all the dust of the land became lice throughout all the land of egypt. 8:18 and the magicians did so with their enchantments to bring forth lice, but they could not: so there were lice upon man, and upon beast. 8:19 then the magicians said unto pharaoh, this is the finger of god: and pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them; as the lord had said. 8:20 and the lord said unto moses, rise up early in the morning, and stand before pharaoh; lo, he cometh forth to the water; and say unto him, thus saith the lord, let my people go, that they may serve me. 8:21 else, if thou wilt not let my people go, behold, i will send swarms of flies upon thee, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thy houses: and the houses of the egyptians shall be full of swarms of flies, and also the ground whereon they are. 8:22 and i will sever in that day the land of goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there; to the end thou mayest know that i am the lord in the midst of the earth. 8:23 and i will put a division between my people and thy people: to morrow shall this sign be. 8:24 and the lord did so; and there came a grievous swarm of flies into the house of pharaoh, and into his servants’ houses, and into all the land of egypt: the land was corrupted by reason of the swarm of flies. 8:25 and pharaoh called for moses and for aaron, and said, go ye, sacrifice to your god in the land. 8:26 and moses said, it is not meet so to do; for we shall sacrifice the abomination of the egyptians to the lord our god: lo, shall we sacrifice the abomination of the egyptians before their eyes, and will they not stone us? 8:27 we will go three days’ journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice to the lord our god, as he shall command us. 8:28 and pharaoh said, i will let you go, that ye may sacrifice to the lord your god in the wilderness; only ye shall not go very far away: intreat for me. 8:29 and moses said, behold, i go out from thee, and i will intreat the lord that the swarms of flies may depart from pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people, to morrow: but let not pharaoh deal deceitfully any more in not letting the people go to sacrifice to the lord. 8:30 and moses went out from pharaoh, and intreated the lord. 8:31 and the lord did according to the word of moses; and he removed the swarms of flies from pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people; there remained not one. 8:32 and pharaoh hardened his heart at this time also, neither would he let the people go. 9:1 then the lord said unto moses, go in unto pharaoh, and tell him, thus saith the lord god of the hebrews, let my people go, that they may serve me. 9:2 for if thou refuse to let them go, and wilt hold them still, 9:3 behold, the hand of the lord is upon thy cattle which is in the field, upon the horses, upon the asses, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and upon the sheep: there shall be a very grievous murrain. 9:4 and the lord shall sever between the cattle of israel and the cattle of egypt: and there shall nothing die of all that is the children’s of israel. 9:5 and the lord appointed a set time, saying, to morrow the lord shall do this thing in the land. 9:6 and the lord did that thing on the morrow, and all the cattle of egypt died: but of the cattle of the children of israel died not one. 9:7 and pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was not one of the cattle of the israelites dead. and the heart of pharaoh was hardened, and he did not let the people go. 9:8 and the lord said unto moses and unto aaron, take to you handfuls of ashes of the furnace, and let moses sprinkle it toward the heaven in the sight of pharaoh. 9:9 and it shall become small dust in all the land of egypt, and shall be a boil breaking forth with blains upon man, and upon beast, throughout all the land of egypt. 9:10 and they took ashes of the furnace, and stood before pharaoh; and moses sprinkled it up toward heaven; and it became a boil breaking forth with blains upon man, and upon beast. 9:11 and the magicians could not stand before moses because of the boils; for the boil was upon the magicians, and upon all the egyptians. 9:12 and the lord hardened the heart of pharaoh, and he hearkened not unto them; as the lord had spoken unto moses. 9:13 and the lord said unto moses, rise up early in the morning, and stand before pharaoh, and say unto him, thus saith the lord god of the hebrews, let my people go, that they may serve me. 9:14 for i will at this time send all my plagues upon thine heart, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people; that thou mayest know that there is none like me in all the earth. 9:15 for now i will stretch out my hand, that i may smite thee and thy people with pestilence; and thou shalt be cut off from the earth. 9:16 and in very deed for this cause have i raised thee up, for to shew in thee my power; and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth. 9:17 as yet exaltest thou thyself against my people, that thou wilt not let them go? 9:18 behold, to morrow about this time i will cause it to rain a very grievous hail, such as hath not been in egypt since the foundation thereof even until now. 9:19 send therefore now, and gather thy cattle, and all that thou hast in the field; for upon every man and beast which shall be found in the field, and shall not be brought home, the hail shall come down upon them, and they shall die. 9:20 he that feared the word of the lord among the servants of pharaoh made his servants and his cattle flee into the houses: 9:21 and he that regarded not the word of the lord left his servants and his cattle in the field. 9:22 and the lord said unto moses, stretch forth thine hand toward heaven, that there may be hail in all the land of egypt, upon man, and upon beast, and upon every herb of the field, throughout the land of egypt. 9:23 and moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven: and the lord sent thunder and hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground; and the lord rained hail upon the land of egypt. 9:24 so there was hail, and fire mingled with the hail, very grievous, such as there was none like it in all the land of egypt since it became a nation. 9:25 and the hail smote throughout all the land of egypt all that was in the field, both man and beast; and the hail smote every herb of the field, and brake every tree of the field. 9:26 only in the land of goshen, where the children of israel were, was there no hail. 9:27 and pharaoh sent, and called for moses and aaron, and said unto them, i have sinned this time: the lord is righteous, and i and my people are wicked. 9:28 intreat the lord (for it is enough) that there be no more mighty thunderings and hail; and i will let you go, and ye shall stay no longer. 9:29 and moses said unto him, as soon as i am gone out of the city, i will spread abroad my hands unto the lord; and the thunder shall cease, neither shall there be any more hail; that thou mayest know how that the earth is the lord’s. 9:30 but as for thee and thy servants, i know that ye will not yet fear the lord god. 9:31 and the flax and the barley was smitten: for the barley was in the ear, and the flax was bolled. 9:32 but the wheat and the rie were not smitten: for they were not grown up. 9:33 and moses went out of the city from pharaoh, and spread abroad his hands unto the lord: and the thunders and hail ceased, and the rain was not poured upon the earth. 9:34 and when pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunders were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his servants. 9:35 and the heart of pharaoh was hardened, neither would he let the children of israel go; as the lord had spoken by moses. 10:1 and the lord said unto moses, go in unto pharaoh: for i have hardened his heart, and the heart of his servants, that i might shew these my signs before him: 10:2 and that thou mayest tell in the ears of thy son, and of thy son’s son, what things i have wrought in egypt, and my signs which i have done among them; that ye may know how that i am the lord. 10:3 and moses and aaron came in unto pharaoh, and said unto him, thus saith the lord god of the hebrews, how long wilt thou refuse to humble thyself before me? let my people go, that they may serve me. 10:4 else, if thou refuse to let my people go, behold, to morrow will i bring the locusts into thy coast: 10:5 and they shall cover the face of the earth, that one cannot be able to see the earth: and they shall eat the residue of that which is escaped, which remaineth unto you from the hail, and shall eat every tree which groweth for you out of the field: 10:6 and they shall fill thy houses, and the houses of all thy servants, and the houses of all the egyptians; which neither thy fathers, nor thy fathers’ fathers have seen, since the day that they were upon the earth unto this day. and he turned himself, and went out from pharaoh. 10:7 and pharaoh’s servants said unto him, how long shall this man be a snare unto us? let the men go, that they may serve the lord their god: knowest thou not yet that egypt is destroyed? 10:8 and moses and aaron were brought again unto pharaoh: and he said unto them, go, serve the lord your god: but who are they that shall go? 10:9 and moses said, we will go with our young and with our old, with our sons and with our daughters, with our flocks and with our herds will we go; for we must hold a feast unto the lord. 10:10 and he said unto them, let the lord be so with you, as i will let you go, and your little ones: look to it; for evil is before you. 10:11 not so: go now ye that are men, and serve the lord; for that ye did desire. and they were driven out from pharaoh’s presence. 10:12 and the lord said unto moses, stretch out thine hand over the land of egypt for the locusts, that they may come up upon the land of egypt, and eat every herb of the land, even all that the hail hath left. 10:13 and moses stretched forth his rod over the land of egypt, and the lord brought an east wind upon the land all that day, and all that night; and when it was morning, the east wind brought the locusts. 10:14 and the locust went up over all the land of egypt, and rested in all the coasts of egypt: very grievous were they; before them there were no such locusts as they, neither after them shall be such. 10:15 for they covered the face of the whole earth, so that the land was darkened; and they did eat every herb of the land, and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had left: and there remained not any green thing in the trees, or in the herbs of the field, through all the land of egypt. 10:16 then pharaoh called for moses and aaron in haste; and he said, i have sinned against the lord your god, and against you. 10:17 now therefore forgive, i pray thee, my sin only this once, and intreat the lord your god, that he may take away from me this death only. 10:18 and he went out from pharaoh, and intreated the lord. 10:19 and the lord turned a mighty strong west wind, which took away the locusts, and cast them into the red sea; there remained not one locust in all the coasts of egypt. 10:20 but the lord hardened pharaoh’s heart, so that he would not let the children of israel go. 10:21 and the lord said unto moses, stretch out thine hand toward heaven, that there may be darkness over the land of egypt, even darkness which may be felt. 10:22 and moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven; and there was a thick darkness in all the land of egypt three days: 10:23 they saw not one another, neither rose any from his place for three days: but all the children of israel had light in their dwellings. 10:24 and pharaoh called unto moses, and said, go ye, serve the lord; only let your flocks and your herds be stayed: let your little ones also go with you. 10:25 and moses said, thou must give us also sacrifices and burnt offerings, that we may sacrifice unto the lord our god. 10:26 our cattle also shall go with us; there shall not an hoof be left behind; for thereof must we take to serve the lord our god; and we know not with what we must serve the lord, until we come thither. 10:27 but the lord hardened pharaoh’s heart, and he would not let them go. 10:28 and pharaoh said unto him, get thee from me, take heed to thyself, see my face no more; for in that day thou seest my face thou shalt die. 10:29 and moses said, thou hast spoken well, i will see thy face again no more. 11:1 and the lord said unto moses, yet will i bring one plague more upon pharaoh, and upon egypt; afterwards he will let you go hence: when he shall let you go, he shall surely thrust you out hence altogether. 11:2 speak now in the ears of the people, and let every man borrow of his neighbour, and every woman of her neighbour, jewels of silver and jewels of gold. 11:3 and the lord gave the people favour in the sight of the egyptians. moreover the man moses was very great in the land of egypt, in the sight of pharaoh’s servants, and in the sight of the people. 11:4 and moses said, thus saith the lord, about midnight will i go out into the midst of egypt: 11:5 and all the firstborn in the land of egypt shall die, from the first born of pharaoh that sitteth upon his throne, even unto the firstborn of the maidservant that is behind the mill; and all the firstborn of beasts. 11:6 and there shall be a great cry throughout all the land of egypt, such as there was none like it, nor shall be like it any more. 11:7 but against any of the children of israel shall not a dog move his tongue, against man or beast: that ye may know how that the lord doth put a difference between the egyptians and israel. 11:8 and all these thy servants shall come down unto me, and bow down themselves unto me, saying, get thee out, and all the people that follow thee: and after that i will go out. and he went out from pharaoh in a great anger. 11:9 and the lord said unto moses, pharaoh shall not hearken unto you; that my wonders may be multiplied in the land of egypt. 11:10 and moses and aaron did all these wonders before pharaoh: and the lord hardened pharaoh’s heart, so that he would not let the children of israel go out of his land. 12:1 and the lord spake unto moses and aaron in the land of egypt saying, 12:2 this month shall be unto you the beginning of months: it shall be the first month of the year to you. 12:3 speak ye unto all the congregation of israel, saying, in the tenth day of this month they shall take to them every man a lamb, according to the house of their fathers, a lamb for an house: 12:4 and if the household be too little for the lamb, let him and his neighbour next unto his house take it according to the number of the souls; every man according to his eating shall make your count for the lamb. 12:5 your lamb shall be without blemish, a male of the first year: ye shall take it out from the sheep, or from the goats: 12:6 and ye shall keep it up until the fourteenth day of the same month: and the whole assembly of the congregation of israel shall kill it in the evening. 12:7 and they shall take of the blood, and strike it on the two side posts and on the upper door post of the houses, wherein they shall eat it. 12:8 and they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and unleavened bread; and with bitter herbs they shall eat it. 12:9 eat not of it raw, nor sodden at all with water, but roast with fire; his head with his legs, and with the purtenance thereof. 12:10 and ye shall let nothing of it remain until the morning; and that which remaineth of it until the morning ye shall burn with fire. 12:11 and thus shall ye eat it; with your loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and your staff in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste: it is the lord’s passover. 12:12 for i will pass through the land of egypt this night, and will smite all the firstborn in the land of egypt, both man and beast; and against all the gods of egypt i will execute judgment: i am the lord. 12:13 and the blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where ye are: and when i see the blood, i will pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon you to destroy you, when i smite the land of egypt. 12:14 and this day shall be unto you for a memorial; and ye shall keep it a feast to the lord throughout your generations; ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for ever. 12:15 seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread; even the first day ye shall put away leaven out of your houses: for whosoever eateth leavened bread from the first day until the seventh day, that soul shall be cut off from israel. 12:16 and in the first day there shall be an holy convocation, and in the seventh day there shall be an holy convocation to you; no manner of work shall be done in them, save that which every man must eat, that only may be done of you. 12:17 and ye shall observe the feast of unleavened bread; for in this selfsame day have i brought your armies out of the land of egypt: therefore shall ye observe this day in your generations by an ordinance for ever. 12:18 in the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at even, ye shall eat unleavened bread, until the one and twentieth day of the month at even. 12:19 seven days shall there be no leaven found in your houses: for whosoever eateth that which is leavened, even that soul shall be cut off from the congregation of israel, whether he be a stranger, or born in the land. 12:20 ye shall eat nothing leavened; in all your habitations shall ye eat unleavened bread. 12:21 then moses called for all the elders of israel, and said unto them, draw out and take you a lamb according to your families, and kill the passover. 12:22 and ye shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood that is in the bason, and strike the lintel and the two side posts with the blood that is in the bason; and none of you shall go out at the door of his house until the morning. 12:23 for the lord will pass through to smite the egyptians; and when he seeth the blood upon the lintel, and on the two side posts, the lord will pass over the door, and will not suffer the destroyer to come in unto your houses to smite you. 12:24 and ye shall observe this thing for an ordinance to thee and to thy sons for ever. 12:25 and it shall come to pass, when ye be come to the land which the lord will give you, according as he hath promised, that ye shall keep this service. 12:26 and it shall come to pass, when your children shall say unto you, what mean ye by this service? 12:27 that ye shall say, it is the sacrifice of the lord’s passover, who passed over the houses of the children of israel in egypt, when he smote the egyptians, and delivered our houses. and the people bowed the head and worshipped. 12:28 and the children of israel went away, and did as the lord had commanded moses and aaron, so did they. 12:29 and it came to pass, that at midnight the lord smote all the firstborn in the land of egypt, from the firstborn of pharaoh that sat on his throne unto the firstborn of the captive that was in the dungeon; and all the firstborn of cattle. 12:30 and pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all his servants, and all the egyptians; and there was a great cry in egypt; for there was not a house where there was not one dead. 12:31 and he called for moses and aaron by night, and said, rise up, and get you forth from among my people, both ye and the children of israel; and go, serve the lord, as ye have said. 12:32 also take your flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and be gone; and bless me also. 12:33 and the egyptians were urgent upon the people, that they might send them out of the land in haste; for they said, we be all dead men. 12:34 and the people took their dough before it was leavened, their kneadingtroughs being bound up in their clothes upon their shoulders. 12:35 and the children of israel did according to the word of moses; and they borrowed of the egyptians jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment: 12:36 and the lord gave the people favour in the sight of the egyptians, so that they lent unto them such things as they required. and they spoiled the egyptians. 12:37 and the children of israel journeyed from rameses to succoth, about six hundred thousand on foot that were men, beside children. 12:38 and a mixed multitude went up also with them; and flocks, and herds, even very much cattle. 12:39 and they baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they brought forth out of egypt, for it was not leavened; because they were thrust out of egypt, and could not tarry, neither had they prepared for themselves any victual. 12:40 now the sojourning of the children of israel, who dwelt in egypt, was four hundred and thirty years. 12:41 and it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty years, even the selfsame day it came to pass, that all the hosts of the lord went out from the land of egypt. 12:42 it is a night to be much observed unto the lord for bringing them out from the land of egypt: this is that night of the lord to be observed of all the children of israel in their generations. 12:43 and the lord said unto moses and aaron, this is the ordinance of the passover: there shall no stranger eat thereof: 12:44 but every man’s servant that is bought for money, when thou hast circumcised him, then shall he eat thereof. 12:45 a foreigner and an hired servant shall not eat thereof. 12:46 in one house shall it be eaten; thou shalt not carry forth ought of the flesh abroad out of the house; neither shall ye break a bone thereof. 12:47 all the congregation of israel shall keep it. 12:48 and when a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the passover to the lord, let all his males be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it; and he shall be as one that is born in the land: for no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof. 12:49 one law shall be to him that is homeborn, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among you. 12:50 thus did all the children of israel; as the lord commanded moses and aaron, so did they. 12:51 and it came to pass the selfsame day, that the lord did bring the children of israel out of the land of egypt by their armies. 13:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 13:2 sanctify unto me all the firstborn, whatsoever openeth the womb among the children of israel, both of man and of beast: it is mine. 13:3 and moses said unto the people, remember this day, in which ye came out from egypt, out of the house of bondage; for by strength of hand the lord brought you out from this place: there shall no leavened bread be eaten. 13:4 this day came ye out in the month abib. 13:5 and it shall be when the lord shall bring thee into the land of the canaanites, and the hittites, and the amorites, and the hivites, and the jebusites, which he sware unto thy fathers to give thee, a land flowing with milk and honey, that thou shalt keep this service in this month. 13:6 seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, and in the seventh day shall be a feast to the lord. 13:7 unleavened bread shall be eaten seven days; and there shall no leavened bread be seen with thee, neither shall there be leaven seen with thee in all thy quarters. 13:8 and thou shalt shew thy son in that day, saying, this is done because of that which the lord did unto me when i came forth out of egypt. 13:9 and it shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes, that the lord’s law may be in thy mouth: for with a strong hand hath the lord brought thee out of egypt. 13:10 thou shalt therefore keep this ordinance in his season from year to year. 13:11 and it shall be when the lord shall bring thee into the land of the canaanites, as he sware unto thee and to thy fathers, and shall give it thee, 13:12 that thou shalt set apart unto the lord all that openeth the matrix, and every firstling that cometh of a beast which thou hast; the males shall be the lord’s. 13:13 and every firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb; and if thou wilt not redeem it, then thou shalt break his neck: and all the firstborn of man among thy children shalt thou redeem. 13:14 and it shall be when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, what is this? that thou shalt say unto him, by strength of hand the lord brought us out from egypt, from the house of bondage: 13:15 and it came to pass, when pharaoh would hardly let us go, that the lord slew all the firstborn in the land of egypt, both the firstborn of man, and the firstborn of beast: therefore i sacrifice to the lord all that openeth the matrix, being males; but all the firstborn of my children i redeem. 13:16 and it shall be for a token upon thine hand, and for frontlets between thine eyes: for by strength of hand the lord brought us forth out of egypt. 13:17 and it came to pass, when pharaoh had let the people go, that god led them not through the way of the land of the philistines, although that was near; for god said, lest peradventure the people repent when they see war, and they return to egypt: 13:18 but god led the people about, through the way of the wilderness of the red sea: and the children of israel went up harnessed out of the land of egypt. 13:19 and moses took the bones of joseph with him: for he had straitly sworn the children of israel, saying, god will surely visit you; and ye shall carry up my bones away hence with you. 13:20 and they took their journey from succoth, and encamped in etham, in the edge of the wilderness. 13:21 and the lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light; to go by day and night: 13:22 he took not away the pillar of the cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by night, from before the people. 14:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 14:2 speak unto the children of israel, that they turn and encamp before pihahiroth, between migdol and the sea, over against baalzephon: before it shall ye encamp by the sea. 14:3 for pharaoh will say of the children of israel, they are entangled in the land, the wilderness hath shut them in. 14:4 and i will harden pharaoh’s heart, that he shall follow after them; and i will be honoured upon pharaoh, and upon all his host; that the egyptians may know that i am the lord. and they did so. 14:5 and it was told the king of egypt that the people fled: and the heart of pharaoh and of his servants was turned against the people, and they said, why have we done this, that we have let israel go from serving us? 14:6 and he made ready his chariot, and took his people with him: 14:7 and he took six hundred chosen chariots, and all the chariots of egypt, and captains over every one of them. 14:8 and the lord hardened the heart of pharaoh king of egypt, and he pursued after the children of israel: and the children of israel went out with an high hand. 14:9 but the egyptians pursued after them, all the horses and chariots of pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army, and overtook them encamping by the sea, beside pihahiroth, before baalzephon. 14:10 and when pharaoh drew nigh, the children of israel lifted up their eyes, and, behold, the egyptians marched after them; and they were sore afraid: and the children of israel cried out unto the lord. 14:11 and they said unto moses, because there were no graves in egypt, hast thou taken us away to die in the wilderness? wherefore hast thou dealt thus with us, to carry us forth out of egypt? 14:12 is not this the word that we did tell thee in egypt, saying, let us alone, that we may serve the egyptians? for it had been better for us to serve the egyptians, than that we should die in the wilderness. 14:13 and moses said unto the people, fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the lord, which he will shew to you to day: for the egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see them again no more for ever. 14:14 the lord shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace. 14:15 and the lord said unto moses, wherefore criest thou unto me? speak unto the children of israel, that they go forward: 14:16 but lift thou up thy rod, and stretch out thine hand over the sea, and divide it: and the children of israel shall go on dry ground through the midst of the sea. 14:17 and i, behold, i will harden the hearts of the egyptians, and they shall follow them: and i will get me honour upon pharaoh, and upon all his host, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen. 14:18 and the egyptians shall know that i am the lord, when i have gotten me honour upon pharaoh, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen. 14:19 and the angel of god, which went before the camp of israel, removed and went behind them; and the pillar of the cloud went from before their face, and stood behind them: 14:20 and it came between the camp of the egyptians and the camp of israel; and it was a cloud and darkness to them, but it gave light by night to these: so that the one came not near the other all the night. 14:21 and moses stretched out his hand over the sea; and the lord caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind all that night, and made the sea dry land, and the waters were divided. 14:22 and the children of israel went into the midst of the sea upon the dry ground: and the waters were a wall unto them on their right hand, and on their left. 14:23 and the egyptians pursued, and went in after them to the midst of the sea, even all pharaoh’s horses, his chariots, and his horsemen. 14:24 and it came to pass, that in the morning watch the lord looked unto the host of the egyptians through the pillar of fire and of the cloud, and troubled the host of the egyptians, 14:25 and took off their chariot wheels, that they drave them heavily: so that the egyptians said, let us flee from the face of israel; for the lord fighteth for them against the egyptians. 14:26 and the lord said unto moses, stretch out thine hand over the sea, that the waters may come again upon the egyptians, upon their chariots, and upon their horsemen. 14:27 and moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and the sea returned to his strength when the morning appeared; and the egyptians fled against it; and the lord overthrew the egyptians in the midst of the sea. 14:28 and the waters returned, and covered the chariots, and the horsemen, and all the host of pharaoh that came into the sea after them; there remained not so much as one of them. 14:29 but the children of israel walked upon dry land in the midst of the sea; and the waters were a wall unto them on their right hand, and on their left. 14:30 thus the lord saved israel that day out of the hand of the egyptians; and israel saw the egyptians dead upon the sea shore. 14:31 and israel saw that great work which the lord did upon the egyptians: and the people feared the lord, and believed the lord, and his servant moses. 15:1 then sang moses and the children of israel this song unto the lord, and spake, saying, i will sing unto the lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously: the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea. 15:2 the lord is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation: he is my god, and i will prepare him an habitation; my father’s god, and i will exalt him. 15:3 the lord is a man of war: the lord is his name. 15:4 pharaoh’s chariots and his host hath he cast into the sea: his chosen captains also are drowned in the red sea. 15:5 the depths have covered them: they sank into the bottom as a stone. 15:6 thy right hand, o lord, is become glorious in power: thy right hand, o lord, hath dashed in pieces the enemy. 15:7 and in the greatness of thine excellency thou hast overthrown them that rose up against thee: thou sentest forth thy wrath, which consumed them as stubble. 15:8 and with the blast of thy nostrils the waters were gathered together, the floods stood upright as an heap, and the depths were congealed in the heart of the sea. 15:9 the enemy said, i will pursue, i will overtake, i will divide the spoil; my lust shall be satisfied upon them; i will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them. 15:10 thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them: they sank as lead in the mighty waters. 15:11 who is like unto thee, o lord, among the gods? who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders? 15:12 thou stretchedst out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them. 15:13 thou in thy mercy hast led forth the people which thou hast redeemed: thou hast guided them in thy strength unto thy holy habitation. 15:14 the people shall hear, and be afraid: sorrow shall take hold on the inhabitants of palestina. 15:15 then the dukes of edom shall be amazed; the mighty men of moab, trembling shall take hold upon them; all the inhabitants of canaan shall melt away. 15:16 fear and dread shall fall upon them; by the greatness of thine arm they shall be as still as a stone; till thy people pass over, o lord, till the people pass over, which thou hast purchased. 15:17 thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, in the place, o lord, which thou hast made for thee to dwell in, in the sanctuary, o lord, which thy hands have established. 15:18 the lord shall reign for ever and ever. 15:19 for the horse of pharaoh went in with his chariots and with his horsemen into the sea, and the lord brought again the waters of the sea upon them; but the children of israel went on dry land in the midst of the sea. 15:20 and miriam the prophetess, the sister of aaron, took a timbrel in her hand; and all the women went out after her with timbrels and with dances. 15:21 and miriam answered them, sing ye to the lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea. 15:22 so moses brought israel from the red sea, and they went out into the wilderness of shur; and they went three days in the wilderness, and found no water. 15:23 and when they came to marah, they could not drink of the waters of marah, for they were bitter: therefore the name of it was called marah. 15:24 and the people murmured against moses, saying, what shall we drink? 15:25 and he cried unto the lord; and the lord shewed him a tree, which when he had cast into the waters, the waters were made sweet: there he made for them a statute and an ordinance, and there he proved them, 15:26 and said, if thou wilt diligently hearken to the voice of the lord thy god, and wilt do that which is right in his sight, and wilt give ear to his commandments, and keep all his statutes, i will put none of these diseases upon thee, which i have brought upon the egyptians: for i am the lord that healeth thee. 15:27 and they came to elim, where were twelve wells of water, and threescore and ten palm trees: and they encamped there by the waters. 16:1 and they took their journey from elim, and all the congregation of the children of israel came unto the wilderness of sin, which is between elim and sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after their departing out of the land of egypt. 16:2 and the whole congregation of the children of israel murmured against moses and aaron in the wilderness: 16:3 and the children of israel said unto them, would to god we had died by the hand of the lord in the land of egypt, when we sat by the flesh pots, and when we did eat bread to the full; for ye have brought us forth into this wilderness, to kill this whole assembly with hunger. 16:4 then said the lord unto moses, behold, i will rain bread from heaven for you; and the people shall go out and gather a certain rate every day, that i may prove them, whether they will walk in my law, or no. 16:5 and it shall come to pass, that on the sixth day they shall prepare that which they bring in; and it shall be twice as much as they gather daily. 16:6 and moses and aaron said unto all the children of israel, at even, then ye shall know that the lord hath brought you out from the land of egypt: 16:7 and in the morning, then ye shall see the glory of the lord; for that he heareth your murmurings against the lord: and what are we, that ye murmur against us? 16:8 and moses said, this shall be, when the lord shall give you in the evening flesh to eat, and in the morning bread to the full; for that the lord heareth your murmurings which ye murmur against him: and what are we? your murmurings are not against us, but against the lord. 16:9 and moses spake unto aaron, say unto all the congregation of the children of israel, come near before the lord: for he hath heard your murmurings. 16:10 and it came to pass, as aaron spake unto the whole congregation of the children of israel, that they looked toward the wilderness, and, behold, the glory of the lord appeared in the cloud. 16:11 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 16:12 i have heard the murmurings of the children of israel: speak unto them, saying, at even ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye shall be filled with bread; and ye shall know that i am the lord your god. 16:13 and it came to pass, that at even the quails came up, and covered the camp: and in the morning the dew lay round about the host. 16:14 and when the dew that lay was gone up, behold, upon the face of the wilderness there lay a small round thing, as small as the hoar frost on the ground. 16:15 and when the children of israel saw it, they said one to another, it is manna: for they wist not what it was. and moses said unto them, this is the bread which the lord hath given you to eat. 16:16 this is the thing which the lord hath commanded, gather of it every man according to his eating, an omer for every man, according to the number of your persons; take ye every man for them which are in his tents. 16:17 and the children of israel did so, and gathered, some more, some less. 16:18 and when they did mete it with an omer, he that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little had no lack; they gathered every man according to his eating. 16:19 and moses said, let no man leave of it till the morning. 16:20 notwithstanding they hearkened not unto moses; but some of them left of it until the morning, and it bred worms, and stank: and moses was wroth with them. 16:21 and they gathered it every morning, every man according to his eating: and when the sun waxed hot, it melted. 16:22 and it came to pass, that on the sixth day they gathered twice as much bread, two omers for one man: and all the rulers of the congregation came and told moses. 16:23 and he said unto them, this is that which the lord hath said, to morrow is the rest of the holy sabbath unto the lord: bake that which ye will bake to day, and seethe that ye will seethe; and that which remaineth over lay up for you to be kept until the morning. 16:24 and they laid it up till the morning, as moses bade: and it did not stink, neither was there any worm therein. 16:25 and moses said, eat that to day; for to day is a sabbath unto the lord: to day ye shall not find it in the field. 16:26 six days ye shall gather it; but on the seventh day, which is the sabbath, in it there shall be none. 16:27 and it came to pass, that there went out some of the people on the seventh day for to gather, and they found none. 16:28 and the lord said unto moses, how long refuse ye to keep my commandments and my laws? 16:29 see, for that the lord hath given you the sabbath, therefore he giveth you on the sixth day the bread of two days; abide ye every man in his place, let no man go out of his place on the seventh day. 16:30 so the people rested on the seventh day. 16:31 and the house of israel called the name thereof manna: and it was like coriander seed, white; and the taste of it was like wafers made with honey. 16:32 and moses said, this is the thing which the lord commandeth, fill an omer of it to be kept for your generations; that they may see the bread wherewith i have fed you in the wilderness, when i brought you forth from the land of egypt. 16:33 and moses said unto aaron, take a pot, and put an omer full of manna therein, and lay it up before the lord, to be kept for your generations. 16:34 as the lord commanded moses, so aaron laid it up before the testimony, to be kept. 16:35 and the children of israel did eat manna forty years, until they came to a land inhabited; they did eat manna, until they came unto the borders of the land of canaan. 16:36 now an omer is the tenth part of an ephah. 17:1 and all the congregation of the children of israel journeyed from the wilderness of sin, after their journeys, according to the commandment of the lord, and pitched in rephidim: and there was no water for the people to drink. 17:2 wherefore the people did chide with moses, and said, give us water that we may drink. and moses said unto them, why chide ye with me? wherefore do ye tempt the lord? 17:3 and the people thirsted there for water; and the people murmured against moses, and said, wherefore is this that thou hast brought us up out of egypt, to kill us and our children and our cattle with thirst? 17:4 and moses cried unto the lord, saying, what shall i do unto this people? they be almost ready to stone me. 17:5 and the lord said unto moses, go on before the people, and take with thee of the elders of israel; and thy rod, wherewith thou smotest the river, take in thine hand, and go. 17:6 behold, i will stand before thee there upon the rock in horeb; and thou shalt smite the rock, and there shall come water out of it, that the people may drink. and moses did so in the sight of the elders of israel. 17:7 and he called the name of the place massah, and meribah, because of the chiding of the children of israel, and because they tempted the lord, saying, is the lord among us, or not? 17:8 then came amalek, and fought with israel in rephidim. 17:9 and moses said unto joshua, choose us out men, and go out, fight with amalek: to morrow i will stand on the top of the hill with the rod of god in mine hand. 17:10 so joshua did as moses had said to him, and fought with amalek: and moses, aaron, and hur went up to the top of the hill. 17:11 and it came to pass, when moses held up his hand, that israel prevailed: and when he let down his hand, amalek prevailed. 17:12 but moses’ hands were heavy; and they took a stone, and put it under him, and he sat thereon; and aaron and hur stayed up his hands, the one on the one side, and the other on the other side; and his hands were steady until the going down of the sun. 17:13 and joshua discomfited amalek and his people with the edge of the sword. 17:14 and the lord said unto moses, write this for a memorial in a book, and rehearse it in the ears of joshua: for i will utterly put out the remembrance of amalek from under heaven. 17:15 and moses built an altar, and called the name of it jehovahnissi: 17:16 for he said, because the lord hath sworn that the lord will have war with amalek from generation to generation. 18:1 when jethro, the priest of midian, moses’ father in law, heard of all that god had done for moses, and for israel his people, and that the lord had brought israel out of egypt; 18:2 then jethro, moses’ father in law, took zipporah, moses’ wife, after he had sent her back, 18:3 and her two sons; of which the name of the one was gershom; for he said, i have been an alien in a strange land: 18:4 and the name of the other was eliezer; for the god of my father, said he, was mine help, and delivered me from the sword of pharaoh: 18:5 and jethro, moses’ father in law, came with his sons and his wife unto moses into the wilderness, where he encamped at the mount of god: 18:6 and he said unto moses, i thy father in law jethro am come unto thee, and thy wife, and her two sons with her. 18:7 and moses went out to meet his father in law, and did obeisance, and kissed him; and they asked each other of their welfare; and they came into the tent. 18:8 and moses told his father in law all that the lord had done unto pharaoh and to the egyptians for israel’s sake, and all the travail that had come upon them by the way, and how the lord delivered them. 18:9 and jethro rejoiced for all the goodness which the lord had done to israel, whom he had delivered out of the hand of the egyptians. 18:10 and jethro said, blessed be the lord, who hath delivered you out of the hand of the egyptians, and out of the hand of pharaoh, who hath delivered the people from under the hand of the egyptians. 18:11 now i know that the lord is greater than all gods: for in the thing wherein they dealt proudly he was above them. 18:12 and jethro, moses’ father in law, took a burnt offering and sacrifices for god: and aaron came, and all the elders of israel, to eat bread with moses’ father in law before god. 18:13 and it came to pass on the morrow, that moses sat to judge the people: and the people stood by moses from the morning unto the evening. 18:14 and when moses’ father in law saw all that he did to the people, he said, what is this thing that thou doest to the people? why sittest thou thyself alone, and all the people stand by thee from morning unto even? 18:15 and moses said unto his father in law, because the people come unto me to enquire of god: 18:16 when they have a matter, they come unto me; and i judge between one and another, and i do make them know the statutes of god, and his laws. 18:17 and moses’ father in law said unto him, the thing that thou doest is not good. 18:18 thou wilt surely wear away, both thou, and this people that is with thee: for this thing is too heavy for thee; thou art not able to perform it thyself alone. 18:19 hearken now unto my voice, i will give thee counsel, and god shall be with thee: be thou for the people to god-ward, that thou mayest bring the causes unto god: 18:20 and thou shalt teach them ordinances and laws, and shalt shew them the way wherein they must walk, and the work that they must do. 18:21 moreover thou shalt provide out of all the people able men, such as fear god, men of truth, hating covetousness; and place such over them, to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens: 18:22 and let them judge the people at all seasons: and it shall be, that every great matter they shall bring unto thee, but every small matter they shall judge: so shall it be easier for thyself, and they shall bear the burden with thee. 18:23 if thou shalt do this thing, and god command thee so, then thou shalt be able to endure, and all this people shall also go to their place in peace. 18:24 so moses hearkened to the voice of his father in law, and did all that he had said. 18:25 and moses chose able men out of all israel, and made them heads over the people, rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens. 18:26 and they judged the people at all seasons: the hard causes they brought unto moses, but every small matter they judged themselves. 18:27 and moses let his father in law depart; and he went his way into his own land. 19:1 in the third month, when the children of israel were gone forth out of the land of egypt, the same day came they into the wilderness of sinai. 19:2 for they were departed from rephidim, and were come to the desert of sinai, and had pitched in the wilderness; and there israel camped before the mount. 19:3 and moses went up unto god, and the lord called unto him out of the mountain, saying, thus shalt thou say to the house of jacob, and tell the children of israel; 19:4 ye have seen what i did unto the egyptians, and how i bare you on eagles’ wings, and brought you unto myself. 19:5 now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine: 19:6 and ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation. these are the words which thou shalt speak unto the children of israel. 19:7 and moses came and called for the elders of the people, and laid before their faces all these words which the lord commanded him. 19:8 and all the people answered together, and said, all that the lord hath spoken we will do. and moses returned the words of the people unto the lord. 19:9 and the lord said unto moses, lo, i come unto thee in a thick cloud, that the people may hear when i speak with thee, and believe thee for ever. and moses told the words of the people unto the lord. 19:10 and the lord said unto moses, go unto the people, and sanctify them to day and to morrow, and let them wash their clothes, 19:11 and be ready against the third day: for the third day the lord will come down in the sight of all the people upon mount sinai. 19:12 and thou shalt set bounds unto the people round about, saying, take heed to yourselves, that ye go not up into the mount, or touch the border of it: whosoever toucheth the mount shall be surely put to death: 19:13 there shall not an hand touch it, but he shall surely be stoned, or shot through; whether it be beast or man, it shall not live: when the trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up to the mount. 19:14 and moses went down from the mount unto the people, and sanctified the people; and they washed their clothes. 19:15 and he said unto the people, be ready against the third day: come not at your wives. 19:16 and it came to pass on the third day in the morning, that there were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud; so that all the people that was in the camp trembled. 19:17 and moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet with god; and they stood at the nether part of the mount. 19:18 and mount sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the lord descended upon it in fire: and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly. 19:19 and when the voice of the trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder and louder, moses spake, and god answered him by a voice. 19:20 and the lord came down upon mount sinai, on the top of the mount: and the lord called moses up to the top of the mount; and moses went up. 19:21 and the lord said unto moses, go down, charge the people, lest they break through unto the lord to gaze, and many of them perish. 19:22 and let the priests also, which come near to the lord, sanctify themselves, lest the lord break forth upon them. 19:23 and moses said unto the lord, the people cannot come up to mount sinai: for thou chargedst us, saying, set bounds about the mount, and sanctify it. 19:24 and the lord said unto him, away, get thee down, and thou shalt come up, thou, and aaron with thee: but let not the priests and the people break through to come up unto the lord, lest he break forth upon them. 19:25 so moses went down unto the people, and spake unto them. 20:1 and god spake all these words, saying, 20:2 i am the lord thy god, which have brought thee out of the land of egypt, out of the house of bondage. 20:3 thou shalt have no other gods before me. 20:4 thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth. 20:5 thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for i the lord thy god am a jealous god, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me; 20:6 and shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments. 20:7 thou shalt not take the name of the lord thy god in vain; for the lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain. 20:8 remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy. 20:9 six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work: 20:10 but the seventh day is the sabbath of the lord thy god: in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates: 20:11 for in six days the lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the lord blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it. 20:12 honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the lord thy god giveth thee. 20:13 thou shalt not kill. 20:14 thou shalt not commit adultery. 20:15 thou shalt not steal. 20:16 thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour. 20:17 thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbour’s. 20:18 and all the people saw the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the noise of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking: and when the people saw it, they removed, and stood afar off. 20:19 and they said unto moses, speak thou with us, and we will hear: but let not god speak with us, lest we die. 20:20 and moses said unto the people, fear not: for god is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before your faces, that ye sin not. 20:21 and the people stood afar off, and moses drew near unto the thick darkness where god was. 20:22 and the lord said unto moses, thus thou shalt say unto the children of israel, ye have seen that i have talked with you from heaven. 20:23 ye shall not make with me gods of silver, neither shall ye make unto you gods of gold. 20:24 an altar of earth thou shalt make unto me, and shalt sacrifice thereon thy burnt offerings, and thy peace offerings, thy sheep, and thine oxen: in all places where i record my name i will come unto thee, and i will bless thee. 20:25 and if thou wilt make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stone: for if thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou hast polluted it. 20:26 neither shalt thou go up by steps unto mine altar, that thy nakedness be not discovered thereon. 21:1 now these are the judgments which thou shalt set before them. 21:2 if thou buy an hebrew servant, six years he shall serve: and in the seventh he shall go out free for nothing. 21:3 if he came in by himself, he shall go out by himself: if he were married, then his wife shall go out with him. 21:4 if his master have given him a wife, and she have born him sons or daughters; the wife and her children shall be her master’s, and he shall go out by himself. 21:5 and if the servant shall plainly say, i love my master, my wife, and my children; i will not go out free: 21:6 then his master shall bring him unto the judges; he shall also bring him to the door, or unto the door post; and his master shall bore his ear through with an aul; and he shall serve him for ever. 21:7 and if a man sell his daughter to be a maidservant, she shall not go out as the menservants do. 21:8 if she please not her master, who hath betrothed her to himself, then shall he let her be redeemed: to sell her unto a strange nation he shall have no power, seeing he hath dealt deceitfully with her. 21:9 and if he have betrothed her unto his son, he shall deal with her after the manner of daughters. 21:10 if he take him another wife; her food, her raiment, and her duty of marriage, shall he not diminish. 21:11 and if he do not these three unto her, then shall she go out free without money. 21:12 he that smiteth a man, so that he die, shall be surely put to death. 21:13 and if a man lie not in wait, but god deliver him into his hand; then i will appoint thee a place whither he shall flee. 21:14 but if a man come presumptuously upon his neighbour, to slay him with guile; thou shalt take him from mine altar, that he may die. 21:15 and he that smiteth his father, or his mother, shall be surely put to death. 21:16 and he that stealeth a man, and selleth him, or if he be found in his hand, he shall surely be put to death. 21:17 and he that curseth his father, or his mother, shall surely be put to death. 21:18 and if men strive together, and one smite another with a stone, or with his fist, and he die not, but keepeth his bed: 21:19 if he rise again, and walk abroad upon his staff, then shall he that smote him be quit: only he shall pay for the loss of his time, and shall cause him to be thoroughly healed. 21:20 and if a man smite his servant, or his maid, with a rod, and he die under his hand; he shall be surely punished. 21:21 notwithstanding, if he continue a day or two, he shall not be punished: for he is his money. 21:22 if men strive, and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit depart from her, and yet no mischief follow: he shall be surely punished, according as the woman’s husband will lay upon him; and he shall pay as the judges determine. 21:23 and if any mischief follow, then thou shalt give life for life, 21:24 eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, 21:25 burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe. 21:26 and if a man smite the eye of his servant, or the eye of his maid, that it perish; he shall let him go free for his eye’s sake. 21:27 and if he smite out his manservant’s tooth, or his maidservant’s tooth; he shall let him go free for his tooth’s sake. 21:28 if an ox gore a man or a woman, that they die: then the ox shall be surely stoned, and his flesh shall not be eaten; but the owner of the ox shall be quit. 21:29 but if the ox were wont to push with his horn in time past, and it hath been testified to his owner, and he hath not kept him in, but that he hath killed a man or a woman; the ox shall be stoned, and his owner also shall be put to death. 21:30 if there be laid on him a sum of money, then he shall give for the ransom of his life whatsoever is laid upon him. 21:31 whether he have gored a son, or have gored a daughter, according to this judgment shall it be done unto him. 21:32 if the ox shall push a manservant or a maidservant; he shall give unto their master thirty shekels of silver, and the ox shall be stoned. 21:33 and if a man shall open a pit, or if a man shall dig a pit, and not cover it, and an ox or an ass fall therein; 21:34 the owner of the pit shall make it good, and give money unto the owner of them; and the dead beast shall be his. 21:35 and if one man’s ox hurt another’s, that he die; then they shall sell the live ox, and divide the money of it; and the dead ox also they shall divide. 21:36 or if it be known that the ox hath used to push in time past, and his owner hath not kept him in; he shall surely pay ox for ox; and the dead shall be his own. 22:1 if a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it; he shall restore five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep. 22:2 if a thief be found breaking up, and be smitten that he die, there shall no blood be shed for him. 22:3 if the sun be risen upon him, there shall be blood shed for him; for he should make full restitution; if he have nothing, then he shall be sold for his theft. 22:4 if the theft be certainly found in his hand alive, whether it be ox, or ass, or sheep; he shall restore double. 22:5 if a man shall cause a field or vineyard to be eaten, and shall put in his beast, and shall feed in another man’s field; of the best of his own field, and of the best of his own vineyard, shall he make restitution. 22:6 if fire break out, and catch in thorns, so that the stacks of corn, or the standing corn, or the field, be consumed therewith; he that kindled the fire shall surely make restitution. 22:7 if a man shall deliver unto his neighbour money or stuff to keep, and it be stolen out of the man’s house; if the thief be found, let him pay double. 22:8 if the thief be not found, then the master of the house shall be brought unto the judges, to see whether he have put his hand unto his neighbour’s goods. 22:9 for all manner of trespass, whether it be for ox, for ass, for sheep, for raiment, or for any manner of lost thing which another challengeth to be his, the cause of both parties shall come before the judges; and whom the judges shall condemn, he shall pay double unto his neighbour. 22:10 if a man deliver unto his neighbour an ass, or an ox, or a sheep, or any beast, to keep; and it die, or be hurt, or driven away, no man seeing it: 22:11 then shall an oath of the lord be between them both, that he hath not put his hand unto his neighbour’s goods; and the owner of it shall accept thereof, and he shall not make it good. 22:12 and if it be stolen from him, he shall make restitution unto the owner thereof. 22:13 if it be torn in pieces, then let him bring it for witness, and he shall not make good that which was torn. 22:14 and if a man borrow ought of his neighbour, and it be hurt, or die, the owner thereof being not with it, he shall surely make it good. 22:15 but if the owner thereof be with it, he shall not make it good: if it be an hired thing, it came for his hire. 22:16 and if a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with her, he shall surely endow her to be his wife. 22:17 if her father utterly refuse to give her unto him, he shall pay money according to the dowry of virgins. 22:18 thou shalt not suffer a witch to live. 22:19 whosoever lieth with a beast shall surely be put to death. 22:20 he that sacrificeth unto any god, save unto the lord only, he shall be utterly destroyed. 22:21 thou shalt neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him: for ye were strangers in the land of egypt. 22:22 ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child. 22:23 if thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, i will surely hear their cry; 22:24 and my wrath shall wax hot, and i will kill you with the sword; and your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless. 22:25 if thou lend money to any of my people that is poor by thee, thou shalt not be to him as an usurer, neither shalt thou lay upon him usury. 22:26 if thou at all take thy neighbour’s raiment to pledge, thou shalt deliver it unto him by that the sun goeth down: 22:27 for that is his covering only, it is his raiment for his skin: wherein shall he sleep? and it shall come to pass, when he crieth unto me, that i will hear; for i am gracious. 22:28 thou shalt not revile the gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people. 22:29 thou shalt not delay to offer the first of thy ripe fruits, and of thy liquors: the firstborn of thy sons shalt thou give unto me. 22:30 likewise shalt thou do with thine oxen, and with thy sheep: seven days it shall be with his dam; on the eighth day thou shalt give it me. 22:31 and ye shall be holy men unto me: neither shall ye eat any flesh that is torn of beasts in the field; ye shall cast it to the dogs. 23:1 thou shalt not raise a false report: put not thine hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness. 23:2 thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil; neither shalt thou speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest judgment: 23:3 neither shalt thou countenance a poor man in his cause. 23:4 if thou meet thine enemy’s ox or his ass going astray, thou shalt surely bring it back to him again. 23:5 if thou see the ass of him that hateth thee lying under his burden, and wouldest forbear to help him, thou shalt surely help with him. 23:6 thou shalt not wrest the judgment of thy poor in his cause. 23:7 keep thee far from a false matter; and the innocent and righteous slay thou not: for i will not justify the wicked. 23:8 and thou shalt take no gift: for the gift blindeth the wise, and perverteth the words of the righteous. 23:9 also thou shalt not oppress a stranger: for ye know the heart of a stranger, seeing ye were strangers in the land of egypt. 23:10 and six years thou shalt sow thy land, and shalt gather in the fruits thereof: 23:11 but the seventh year thou shalt let it rest and lie still; that the poor of thy people may eat: and what they leave the beasts of the field shall eat. in like manner thou shalt deal with thy vineyard, and with thy oliveyard. 23:12 six days thou shalt do thy work, and on the seventh day thou shalt rest: that thine ox and thine ass may rest, and the son of thy handmaid, and the stranger, may be refreshed. 23:13 and in all things that i have said unto you be circumspect: and make no mention of the name of other gods, neither let it be heard out of thy mouth. 23:14 three times thou shalt keep a feast unto me in the year. 23:15 thou shalt keep the feast of unleavened bread: (thou shalt eat unleavened bread seven days, as i commanded thee, in the time appointed of the month abib; for in it thou camest out from egypt: and none shall appear before me empty:) 23:16 and the feast of harvest, the firstfruits of thy labours, which thou hast sown in the field: and the feast of ingathering, which is in the end of the year, when thou hast gathered in thy labours out of the field. 23:17 three times in the year all thy males shall appear before the lord god. 23:18 thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leavened bread; neither shall the fat of my sacrifice remain until the morning. 23:19 the first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring into the house of the lord thy god. thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother’s milk. 23:20 behold, i send an angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place which i have prepared. 23:21 beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not; for he will not pardon your transgressions: for my name is in him. 23:22 but if thou shalt indeed obey his voice, and do all that i speak; then i will be an enemy unto thine enemies, and an adversary unto thine adversaries. 23:23 for mine angel shall go before thee, and bring thee in unto the amorites, and the hittites, and the perizzites, and the canaanites, the hivites, and the jebusites: and i will cut them off. 23:24 thou shalt not bow down to their gods, nor serve them, nor do after their works: but thou shalt utterly overthrow them, and quite break down their images. 23:25 and ye shall serve the lord your god, and he shall bless thy bread, and thy water; and i will take sickness away from the midst of thee. 23:26 there shall nothing cast their young, nor be barren, in thy land: the number of thy days i will fulfil. 23:27 i will send my fear before thee, and will destroy all the people to whom thou shalt come, and i will make all thine enemies turn their backs unto thee. 23:28 and i will send hornets before thee, which shall drive out the hivite, the canaanite, and the hittite, from before thee. 23:29 i will not drive them out from before thee in one year; lest the land become desolate, and the beast of the field multiply against thee. 23:30 by little and little i will drive them out from before thee, until thou be increased, and inherit the land. 23:31 and i will set thy bounds from the red sea even unto the sea of the philistines, and from the desert unto the river: for i will deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hand; and thou shalt drive them out before thee. 23:32 thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor with their gods. 23:33 they shall not dwell in thy land, lest they make thee sin against me: for if thou serve their gods, it will surely be a snare unto thee. 24:1 and he said unto moses, come up unto the lord, thou, and aaron, nadab, and abihu, and seventy of the elders of israel; and worship ye afar off. 24:2 and moses alone shall come near the lord: but they shall not come nigh; neither shall the people go up with him. 24:3 and moses came and told the people all the words of the lord, and all the judgments: and all the people answered with one voice, and said, all the words which the lord hath said will we do. 24:4 and moses wrote all the words of the lord, and rose up early in the morning, and builded an altar under the hill, and twelve pillars, according to the twelve tribes of israel. 24:5 and he sent young men of the children of israel, which offered burnt offerings, and sacrificed peace offerings of oxen unto the lord. 24:6 and moses took half of the blood, and put it in basons; and half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar. 24:7 and he took the book of the covenant, and read in the audience of the people: and they said, all that the lord hath said will we do, and be obedient. 24:8 and moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and said, behold the blood of the covenant, which the lord hath made with you concerning all these words. 24:9 then went up moses, and aaron, nadab, and abihu, and seventy of the elders of israel: 24:10 and they saw the god of israel: and there was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness. 24:11 and upon the nobles of the children of israel he laid not his hand: also they saw god, and did eat and drink. 24:12 and the lord said unto moses, come up to me into the mount, and be there: and i will give thee tables of stone, and a law, and commandments which i have written; that thou mayest teach them. 24:13 and moses rose up, and his minister joshua: and moses went up into the mount of god. 24:14 and he said unto the elders, tarry ye here for us, until we come again unto you: and, behold, aaron and hur are with you: if any man have any matters to do, let him come unto them. 24:15 and moses went up into the mount, and a cloud covered the mount. 24:16 and the glory of the lord abode upon mount sinai, and the cloud covered it six days: and the seventh day he called unto moses out of the midst of the cloud. 24:17 and the sight of the glory of the lord was like devouring fire on the top of the mount in the eyes of the children of israel. 24:18 and moses went into the midst of the cloud, and gat him up into the mount: and moses was in the mount forty days and forty nights. 25:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 25:2 speak unto the children of israel, that they bring me an offering: of every man that giveth it willingly with his heart ye shall take my offering. 25:3 and this is the offering which ye shall take of them; gold, and silver, and brass, 25:4 and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats’ hair, 25:5 and rams’ skins dyed red, and badgers’ skins, and shittim wood, 25:6 oil for the light, spices for anointing oil, and for sweet incense, 25:7 onyx stones, and stones to be set in the ephod, and in the breastplate. 25:8 and let them make me a sanctuary; that i may dwell among them. 25:9 according to all that i shew thee, after the pattern of the tabernacle, and the pattern of all the instruments thereof, even so shall ye make it. 25:10 and they shall make an ark of shittim wood: two cubits and a half shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof. 25:11 and thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, within and without shalt thou overlay it, and shalt make upon it a crown of gold round about. 25:12 and thou shalt cast four rings of gold for it, and put them in the four corners thereof; and two rings shall be in the one side of it, and two rings in the other side of it. 25:13 and thou shalt make staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold. 25:14 and thou shalt put the staves into the rings by the sides of the ark, that the ark may be borne with them. 25:15 the staves shall be in the rings of the ark: they shall not be taken from it. 25:16 and thou shalt put into the ark the testimony which i shall give thee. 25:17 and thou shalt make a mercy seat of pure gold: two cubits and a half shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof. 25:18 and thou shalt make two cherubims of gold, of beaten work shalt thou make them, in the two ends of the mercy seat. 25:19 and make one cherub on the one end, and the other cherub on the other end: even of the mercy seat shall ye make the cherubims on the two ends thereof. 25:20 and the cherubims shall stretch forth their wings on high, covering the mercy seat with their wings, and their faces shall look one to another; toward the mercy seat shall the faces of the cherubims be. 25:21 and thou shalt put the mercy seat above upon the ark; and in the ark thou shalt put the testimony that i shall give thee. 25:22 and there i will meet with thee, and i will commune with thee from above the mercy seat, from between the two cherubims which are upon the ark of the testimony, of all things which i will give thee in commandment unto the children of israel. 25:23 thou shalt also make a table of shittim wood: two cubits shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof. 25:24 and thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, and make thereto a crown of gold round about. 25:25 and thou shalt make unto it a border of an hand breadth round about, and thou shalt make a golden crown to the border thereof round about. 25:26 and thou shalt make for it four rings of gold, and put the rings in the four corners that are on the four feet thereof. 25:27 over against the border shall the rings be for places of the staves to bear the table. 25:28 and thou shalt make the staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold, that the table may be borne with them. 25:29 and thou shalt make the dishes thereof, and spoons thereof, and covers thereof, and bowls thereof, to cover withal: of pure gold shalt thou make them. 25:30 and thou shalt set upon the table shewbread before me alway. 25:31 and thou shalt make a candlestick of pure gold: of beaten work shall the candlestick be made: his shaft, and his branches, his bowls, his knops, and his flowers, shall be of the same. 25:32 and six branches shall come out of the sides of it; three branches of the candlestick out of the one side, and three branches of the candlestick out of the other side: 25:33 three bowls made like unto almonds, with a knop and a flower in one branch; and three bowls made like almonds in the other branch, with a knop and a flower: so in the six branches that come out of the candlestick. 25:34 and in the candlesticks shall be four bowls made like unto almonds, with their knops and their flowers. 25:35 and there shall be a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, according to the six branches that proceed out of the candlestick. 25:36 their knops and their branches shall be of the same: all it shall be one beaten work of pure gold. 25:37 and thou shalt make the seven lamps thereof: and they shall light the lamps thereof, that they may give light over against it. 25:38 and the tongs thereof, and the snuffdishes thereof, shall be of pure gold. 25:39 of a talent of pure gold shall he make it, with all these vessels. 25:40 and look that thou make them after their pattern, which was shewed thee in the mount. 26:1 moreover thou shalt make the tabernacle with ten curtains of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet: with cherubims of cunning work shalt thou make them. 26:2 the length of one curtain shall be eight and twenty cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: and every one of the curtains shall have one measure. 26:3 the five curtains shall be coupled together one to another; and other five curtains shall be coupled one to another. 26:4 and thou shalt make loops of blue upon the edge of the one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling; and likewise shalt thou make in the uttermost edge of another curtain, in the coupling of the second. 26:5 fifty loops shalt thou make in the one curtain, and fifty loops shalt thou make in the edge of the curtain that is in the coupling of the second; that the loops may take hold one of another. 26:6 and thou shalt make fifty taches of gold, and couple the curtains together with the taches: and it shall be one tabernacle. 26:7 and thou shalt make curtains of goats’ hair to be a covering upon the tabernacle: eleven curtains shalt thou make. 26:8 the length of one curtain shall be thirty cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: and the eleven curtains shall be all of one measure. 26:9 and thou shalt couple five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves, and shalt double the sixth curtain in the forefront of the tabernacle. 26:10 and thou shalt make fifty loops on the edge of the one curtain that is outmost in the coupling, and fifty loops in the edge of the curtain which coupleth the second. 26:11 and thou shalt make fifty taches of brass, and put the taches into the loops, and couple the tent together, that it may be one. 26:12 and the remnant that remaineth of the curtains of the tent, the half curtain that remaineth, shall hang over the backside of the tabernacle. 26:13 and a cubit on the one side, and a cubit on the other side of that which remaineth in the length of the curtains of the tent, it shall hang over the sides of the tabernacle on this side and on that side, to cover it. 26:14 and thou shalt make a covering for the tent of rams’ skins dyed red, and a covering above of badgers’ skins. 26:15 and thou shalt make boards for the tabernacle of shittim wood standing up. 26:16 ten cubits shall be the length of a board, and a cubit and a half shall be the breadth of one board. 26:17 two tenons shall there be in one board, set in order one against another: thus shalt thou make for all the boards of the tabernacle. 26:18 and thou shalt make the boards for the tabernacle, twenty boards on the south side southward. 26:19 and thou shalt make forty sockets of silver under the twenty boards; two sockets under one board for his two tenons, and two sockets under another board for his two tenons. 26:20 and for the second side of the tabernacle on the north side there shall be twenty boards: 26:21 and their forty sockets of silver; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board. 26:22 and for the sides of the tabernacle westward thou shalt make six boards. 26:23 and two boards shalt thou make for the corners of the tabernacle in the two sides. 26:24 and they shall be coupled together beneath, and they shall be coupled together above the head of it unto one ring: thus shall it be for them both; they shall be for the two corners. 26:25 and they shall be eight boards, and their sockets of silver, sixteen sockets; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board. 26:26 and thou shalt make bars of shittim wood; five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle, 26:27 and five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the side of the tabernacle, for the two sides westward. 26:28 and the middle bar in the midst of the boards shall reach from end to end. 26:29 and thou shalt overlay the boards with gold, and make their rings of gold for places for the bars: and thou shalt overlay the bars with gold. 26:30 and thou shalt rear up the tabernacle according to the fashion thereof which was shewed thee in the mount. 26:31 and thou shalt make a vail of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen of cunning work: with cherubims shall it be made: 26:32 and thou shalt hang it upon four pillars of shittim wood overlaid with gold: their hooks shall be of gold, upon the four sockets of silver. 26:33 and thou shalt hang up the vail under the taches, that thou mayest bring in thither within the vail the ark of the testimony: and the vail shall divide unto you between the holy place and the most holy. 26:34 and thou shalt put the mercy seat upon the ark of the testimony in the most holy place. 26:35 and thou shalt set the table without the vail, and the candlestick over against the table on the side of the tabernacle toward the south: and thou shalt put the table on the north side. 26:36 and thou shalt make an hanging for the door of the tent, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, wrought with needlework. 26:37 and thou shalt make for the hanging five pillars of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold, and their hooks shall be of gold: and thou shalt cast five sockets of brass for them. 27:1 and thou shalt make an altar of shittim wood, five cubits long, and five cubits broad; the altar shall be foursquare: and the height thereof shall be three cubits. 27:2 and thou shalt make the horns of it upon the four corners thereof: his horns shall be of the same: and thou shalt overlay it with brass. 27:3 and thou shalt make his pans to receive his ashes, and his shovels, and his basons, and his fleshhooks, and his firepans: all the vessels thereof thou shalt make of brass. 27:4 and thou shalt make for it a grate of network of brass; and upon the net shalt thou make four brasen rings in the four corners thereof. 27:5 and thou shalt put it under the compass of the altar beneath, that the net may be even to the midst of the altar. 27:6 and thou shalt make staves for the altar, staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with brass. 27:7 and the staves shall be put into the rings, and the staves shall be upon the two sides of the altar, to bear it. 27:8 hollow with boards shalt thou make it: as it was shewed thee in the mount, so shall they make it. 27:9 and thou shalt make the court of the tabernacle: for the south side southward there shall be hangings for the court of fine twined linen of an hundred cubits long for one side: 27:10 and the twenty pillars thereof and their twenty sockets shall be of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets shall be of silver. 27:11 and likewise for the north side in length there shall be hangings of an hundred cubits long, and his twenty pillars and their twenty sockets of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver. 27:12 and for the breadth of the court on the west side shall be hangings of fifty cubits: their pillars ten, and their sockets ten. 27:13 and the breadth of the court on the east side eastward shall be fifty cubits. 27:14 the hangings of one side of the gate shall be fifteen cubits: their pillars three, and their sockets three. 27:15 and on the other side shall be hangings fifteen cubits: their pillars three, and their sockets three. 27:16 and for the gate of the court shall be an hanging of twenty cubits, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, wrought with needlework: and their pillars shall be four, and their sockets four. 27:17 all the pillars round about the court shall be filleted with silver; their hooks shall be of silver, and their sockets of brass. 27:18 the length of the court shall be an hundred cubits, and the breadth fifty every where, and the height five cubits of fine twined linen, and their sockets of brass. 27:19 all the vessels of the tabernacle in all the service thereof, and all the pins thereof, and all the pins of the court, shall be of brass. 27:20 and thou shalt command the children of israel, that they bring thee pure oil olive beaten for the light, to cause the lamp to burn always. 27:21 in the tabernacle of the congregation without the vail, which is before the testimony, aaron and his sons shall order it from evening to morning before the lord: it shall be a statute for ever unto their generations on the behalf of the children of israel. 28:1 and take thou unto thee aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, from among the children of israel, that he may minister unto me in the priest’s office, even aaron, nadab and abihu, eleazar and ithamar, aaron’s sons. 28:2 and thou shalt make holy garments for aaron thy brother for glory and for beauty. 28:3 and thou shalt speak unto all that are wise hearted, whom i have filled with the spirit of wisdom, that they may make aaron’s garments to consecrate him, that he may minister unto me in the priest’s office. 28:4 and these are the garments which they shall make; a breastplate, and an ephod, and a robe, and a broidered coat, a mitre, and a girdle: and they shall make holy garments for aaron thy brother, and his sons, that he may minister unto me in the priest’s office. 28:5 and they shall take gold, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen. 28:6 and they shall make the ephod of gold, of blue, and of purple, of scarlet, and fine twined linen, with cunning work. 28:7 it shall have the two shoulderpieces thereof joined at the two edges thereof; and so it shall be joined together. 28:8 and the curious girdle of the ephod, which is upon it, shall be of the same, according to the work thereof; even of gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen. 28:9 and thou shalt take two onyx stones, and grave on them the names of the children of israel: 28:10 six of their names on one stone, and the other six names of the rest on the other stone, according to their birth. 28:11 with the work of an engraver in stone, like the engravings of a signet, shalt thou engrave the two stones with the names of the children of israel: thou shalt make them to be set in ouches of gold. 28:12 and thou shalt put the two stones upon the shoulders of the ephod for stones of memorial unto the children of israel: and aaron shall bear their names before the lord upon his two shoulders for a memorial. 28:13 and thou shalt make ouches of gold; 28:14 and two chains of pure gold at the ends; of wreathen work shalt thou make them, and fasten the wreathen chains to the ouches. 28:15 and thou shalt make the breastplate of judgment with cunning work; after the work of the ephod thou shalt make it; of gold, of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, and of fine twined linen, shalt thou make it. 28:16 foursquare it shall be being doubled; a span shall be the length thereof, and a span shall be the breadth thereof. 28:17 and thou shalt set in it settings of stones, even four rows of stones: the first row shall be a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: this shall be the first row. 28:18 and the second row shall be an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond. 28:19 and the third row a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst. 28:20 and the fourth row a beryl, and an onyx, and a jasper: they shall be set in gold in their inclosings. 28:21 and the stones shall be with the names of the children of israel, twelve, according to their names, like the engravings of a signet; every one with his name shall they be according to the twelve tribes. 28:22 and thou shalt make upon the breastplate chains at the ends of wreathen work of pure gold. 28:23 and thou shalt make upon the breastplate two rings of gold, and shalt put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate. 28:24 and thou shalt put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings which are on the ends of the breastplate. 28:25 and the other two ends of the two wreathen chains thou shalt fasten in the two ouches, and put them on the shoulderpieces of the ephod before it. 28:26 and thou shalt make two rings of gold, and thou shalt put them upon the two ends of the breastplate in the border thereof, which is in the side of the ephod inward. 28:27 and two other rings of gold thou shalt make, and shalt put them on the two sides of the ephod underneath, toward the forepart thereof, over against the other coupling thereof, above the curious girdle of the ephod. 28:28 and they shall bind the breastplate by the rings thereof unto the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it may be above the curious girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate be not loosed from the ephod. 28:29 and aaron shall bear the names of the children of israel in the breastplate of judgment upon his heart, when he goeth in unto the holy place, for a memorial before the lord continually. 28:30 and thou shalt put in the breastplate of judgment the urim and the thummim; and they shall be upon aaron’s heart, when he goeth in before the lord: and aaron shall bear the judgment of the children of israel upon his heart before the lord continually. 28:31 and thou shalt make the robe of the ephod all of blue. 28:32 and there shall be an hole in the top of it, in the midst thereof: it shall have a binding of woven work round about the hole of it, as it were the hole of an habergeon, that it be not rent. 28:33 and beneath upon the hem of it thou shalt make pomegranates of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, round about the hem thereof; and bells of gold between them round about: 28:34 a golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, upon the hem of the robe round about. 28:35 and it shall be upon aaron to minister: and his sound shall be heard when he goeth in unto the holy place before the lord, and when he cometh out, that he die not. 28:36 and thou shalt make a plate of pure gold, and grave upon it, like the engravings of a signet, holiness to the lord. 28:37 and thou shalt put it on a blue lace, that it may be upon the mitre; upon the forefront of the mitre it shall be. 28:38 and it shall be upon aaron’s forehead, that aaron may bear the iniquity of the holy things, which the children of israel shall hallow in all their holy gifts; and it shall be always upon his forehead, that they may be accepted before the lord. 28:39 and thou shalt embroider the coat of fine linen, and thou shalt make the mitre of fine linen, and thou shalt make the girdle of needlework. 28:40 and for aaron’s sons thou shalt make coats, and thou shalt make for them girdles, and bonnets shalt thou make for them, for glory and for beauty. 28:41 and thou shalt put them upon aaron thy brother, and his sons with him; and shalt anoint them, and consecrate them, and sanctify them, that they may minister unto me in the priest’s office. 28:42 and thou shalt make them linen breeches to cover their nakedness; from the loins even unto the thighs they shall reach: 28:43 and they shall be upon aaron, and upon his sons, when they come in unto the tabernacle of the congregation, or when they come near unto the altar to minister in the holy place; that they bear not iniquity, and die: it shall be a statute for ever unto him and his seed after him. 29:1 and this is the thing that thou shalt do unto them to hallow them, to minister unto me in the priest’s office: take one young bullock, and two rams without blemish, 29:2 and unleavened bread, and cakes unleavened tempered with oil, and wafers unleavened anointed with oil: of wheaten flour shalt thou make them. 29:3 and thou shalt put them into one basket, and bring them in the basket, with the bullock and the two rams. 29:4 and aaron and his sons thou shalt bring unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and shalt wash them with water. 29:5 and thou shalt take the garments, and put upon aaron the coat, and the robe of the ephod, and the ephod, and the breastplate, and gird him with the curious girdle of the ephod: 29:6 and thou shalt put the mitre upon his head, and put the holy crown upon the mitre. 29:7 then shalt thou take the anointing oil, and pour it upon his head, and anoint him. 29:8 and thou shalt bring his sons, and put coats upon them. 29:9 and thou shalt gird them with girdles, aaron and his sons, and put the bonnets on them: and the priest’s office shall be theirs for a perpetual statute: and thou shalt consecrate aaron and his sons. 29:10 and thou shalt cause a bullock to be brought before the tabernacle of the congregation: and aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the bullock. 29:11 and thou shalt kill the bullock before the lord, by the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. 29:12 and thou shalt take of the blood of the bullock, and put it upon the horns of the altar with thy finger, and pour all the blood beside the bottom of the altar. 29:13 and thou shalt take all the fat that covereth the inwards, and the caul that is above the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and burn them upon the altar. 29:14 but the flesh of the bullock, and his skin, and his dung, shalt thou burn with fire without the camp: it is a sin offering. 29:15 thou shalt also take one ram; and aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the ram. 29:16 and thou shalt slay the ram, and thou shalt take his blood, and sprinkle it round about upon the altar. 29:17 and thou shalt cut the ram in pieces, and wash the inwards of him, and his legs, and put them unto his pieces, and unto his head. 29:18 and thou shalt burn the whole ram upon the altar: it is a burnt offering unto the lord: it is a sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the lord. 29:19 and thou shalt take the other ram; and aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the ram. 29:20 then shalt thou kill the ram, and take of his blood, and put it upon the tip of the right ear of aaron, and upon the tip of the right ear of his sons, and upon the thumb of their right hand, and upon the great toe of their right foot, and sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about. 29:21 and thou shalt take of the blood that is upon the altar, and of the anointing oil, and sprinkle it upon aaron, and upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon the garments of his sons with him: and he shall be hallowed, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons’ garments with him. 29:22 also thou shalt take of the ram the fat and the rump, and the fat that covereth the inwards, and the caul above the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and the right shoulder; for it is a ram of consecration: 29:23 and one loaf of bread, and one cake of oiled bread, and one wafer out of the basket of the unleavened bread that is before the lord: 29:24 and thou shalt put all in the hands of aaron, and in the hands of his sons; and shalt wave them for a wave offering before the lord. 29:25 and thou shalt receive them of their hands, and burn them upon the altar for a burnt offering, for a sweet savour before the lord: it is an offering made by fire unto the lord. 29:26 and thou shalt take the breast of the ram of aaron’s consecration, and wave it for a wave offering before the lord: and it shall be thy part. 29:27 and thou shalt sanctify the breast of the wave offering, and the shoulder of the heave offering, which is waved, and which is heaved up, of the ram of the consecration, even of that which is for aaron, and of that which is for his sons: 29:28 and it shall be aaron’s and his sons’ by a statute for ever from the children of israel: for it is an heave offering: and it shall be an heave offering from the children of israel of the sacrifice of their peace offerings, even their heave offering unto the lord. 29:29 and the holy garments of aaron shall be his sons’ after him, to be anointed therein, and to be consecrated in them. 29:30 and that son that is priest in his stead shall put them on seven days, when he cometh into the tabernacle of the congregation to minister in the holy place. 29:31 and thou shalt take the ram of the consecration, and seethe his flesh in the holy place. 29:32 and aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram, and the bread that is in the basket by the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. 29:33 and they shall eat those things wherewith the atonement was made, to consecrate and to sanctify them: but a stranger shall not eat thereof, because they are holy. 29:34 and if ought of the flesh of the consecrations, or of the bread, remain unto the morning, then thou shalt burn the remainder with fire: it shall not be eaten, because it is holy. 29:35 and thus shalt thou do unto aaron, and to his sons, according to all things which i have commanded thee: seven days shalt thou consecrate them. 29:36 and thou shalt offer every day a bullock for a sin offering for atonement: and thou shalt cleanse the altar, when thou hast made an atonement for it, and thou shalt anoint it, to sanctify it. 29:37 seven days thou shalt make an atonement for the altar, and sanctify it; and it shall be an altar most holy: whatsoever toucheth the altar shall be holy. 29:38 now this is that which thou shalt offer upon the altar; two lambs of the first year day by day continually. 29:39 the one lamb thou shalt offer in the morning; and the other lamb thou shalt offer at even: 29:40 and with the one lamb a tenth deal of flour mingled with the fourth part of an hin of beaten oil; and the fourth part of an hin of wine for a drink offering. 29:41 and the other lamb thou shalt offer at even, and shalt do thereto according to the meat offering of the morning, and according to the drink offering thereof, for a sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the lord. 29:42 this shall be a continual burnt offering throughout your generations at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before the lord: where i will meet you, to speak there unto thee. 29:43 and there i will meet with the children of israel, and the tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory. 29:44 and i will sanctify the tabernacle of the congregation, and the altar: i will sanctify also both aaron and his sons, to minister to me in the priest’s office. 29:45 and i will dwell among the children of israel, and will be their god. 29:46 and they shall know that i am the lord their god, that brought them forth out of the land of egypt, that i may dwell among them: i am the lord their god. 30:1 and thou shalt make an altar to burn incense upon: of shittim wood shalt thou make it. 30:2 a cubit shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof; foursquare shall it be: and two cubits shall be the height thereof: the horns thereof shall be of the same. 30:3 and thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, the top thereof, and the sides thereof round about, and the horns thereof; and thou shalt make unto it a crown of gold round about. 30:4 and two golden rings shalt thou make to it under the crown of it, by the two corners thereof, upon the two sides of it shalt thou make it; and they shall be for places for the staves to bear it withal. 30:5 and thou shalt make the staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold. 30:6 and thou shalt put it before the vail that is by the ark of the testimony, before the mercy seat that is over the testimony, where i will meet with thee. 30:7 and aaron shall burn thereon sweet incense every morning: when he dresseth the lamps, he shall burn incense upon it. 30:8 and when aaron lighteth the lamps at even, he shall burn incense upon it, a perpetual incense before the lord throughout your generations. 30:9 ye shall offer no strange incense thereon, nor burnt sacrifice, nor meat offering; neither shall ye pour drink offering thereon. 30:10 and aaron shall make an atonement upon the horns of it once in a year with the blood of the sin offering of atonements: once in the year shall he make atonement upon it throughout your generations: it is most holy unto the lord. 30:11 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 30:12 when thou takest the sum of the children of israel after their number, then shall they give every man a ransom for his soul unto the lord, when thou numberest them; that there be no plague among them, when thou numberest them. 30:13 this they shall give, every one that passeth among them that are numbered, half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary: (a shekel is twenty gerahs:) an half shekel shall be the offering of the lord. 30:14 every one that passeth among them that are numbered, from twenty years old and above, shall give an offering unto the lord. 30:15 the rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less than half a shekel, when they give an offering unto the lord, to make an atonement for your souls. 30:16 and thou shalt take the atonement money of the children of israel, and shalt appoint it for the service of the tabernacle of the congregation; that it may be a memorial unto the children of israel before the lord, to make an atonement for your souls. 30:17 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 30:18 thou shalt also make a laver of brass, and his foot also of brass, to wash withal: and thou shalt put it between the tabernacle of the congregation and the altar, and thou shalt put water therein. 30:19 for aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet thereat: 30:20 when they go into the tabernacle of the congregation, they shall wash with water, that they die not; or when they come near to the altar to minister, to burn offering made by fire unto the lord: 30:21 so they shall wash their hands and their feet, that they die not: and it shall be a statute for ever to them, even to him and to his seed throughout their generations. 30:22 moreover the lord spake unto moses, saying, 30:23 take thou also unto thee principal spices, of pure myrrh five hundred shekels, and of sweet cinnamon half so much, even two hundred and fifty shekels, and of sweet calamus two hundred and fifty shekels, 30:24 and of cassia five hundred shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, and of oil olive an hin: 30:25 and thou shalt make it an oil of holy ointment, an ointment compound after the art of the apothecary: it shall be an holy anointing oil. 30:26 and thou shalt anoint the tabernacle of the congregation therewith, and the ark of the testimony, 30:27 and the table and all his vessels, and the candlestick and his vessels, and the altar of incense, 30:28 and the altar of burnt offering with all his vessels, and the laver and his foot. 30:29 and thou shalt sanctify them, that they may be most holy: whatsoever toucheth them shall be holy. 30:30 and thou shalt anoint aaron and his sons, and consecrate them, that they may minister unto me in the priest’s office. 30:31 and thou shalt speak unto the children of israel, saying, this shall be an holy anointing oil unto me throughout your generations. 30:32 upon man’s flesh shall it not be poured, neither shall ye make any other like it, after the composition of it: it is holy, and it shall be holy unto you. 30:33 whosoever compoundeth any like it, or whosoever putteth any of it upon a stranger, shall even be cut off from his people. 30:34 and the lord said unto moses, take unto thee sweet spices, stacte, and onycha, and galbanum; these sweet spices with pure frankincense: of each shall there be a like weight: 30:35 and thou shalt make it a perfume, a confection after the art of the apothecary, tempered together, pure and holy: 30:36 and thou shalt beat some of it very small, and put of it before the testimony in the tabernacle of the congregation, where i will meet with thee: it shall be unto you most holy. 30:37 and as for the perfume which thou shalt make, ye shall not make to yourselves according to the composition thereof: it shall be unto thee holy for the lord. 30:38 whosoever shall make like unto that, to smell thereto, shall even be cut off from his people. 31:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 31:2 see, i have called by name bezaleel the son of uri, the son of hur, of the tribe of judah: 31:3 and i have filled him with the spirit of god, in wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship, 31:4 to devise cunning works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass, 31:5 and in cutting of stones, to set them, and in carving of timber, to work in all manner of workmanship. 31:6 and i, behold, i have given with him aholiab, the son of ahisamach, of the tribe of dan: and in the hearts of all that are wise hearted i have put wisdom, that they may make all that i have commanded thee; 31:7 the tabernacle of the congregation, and the ark of the testimony, and the mercy seat that is thereupon, and all the furniture of the tabernacle, 31:8 and the table and his furniture, and the pure candlestick with all his furniture, and the altar of incense, 31:9 and the altar of burnt offering with all his furniture, and the laver and his foot, 31:10 and the cloths of service, and the holy garments for aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest’s office, 31:11 and the anointing oil, and sweet incense for the holy place: according to all that i have commanded thee shall they do. 31:12 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 31:13 speak thou also unto the children of israel, saying, verily my sabbaths ye shall keep: for it is a sign between me and you throughout your generations; that ye may know that i am the lord that doth sanctify you. 31:14 ye shall keep the sabbath therefore; for it is holy unto you: every one that defileth it shall surely be put to death: for whosoever doeth any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from among his people. 31:15 six days may work be done; but in the seventh is the sabbath of rest, holy to the lord: whosoever doeth any work in the sabbath day, he shall surely be put to death. 31:16 wherefore the children of israel shall keep the sabbath, to observe the sabbath throughout their generations, for a perpetual covenant. 31:17 it is a sign between me and the children of israel for ever: for in six days the lord made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed. 31:18 and he gave unto moses, when he had made an end of communing with him upon mount sinai, two tables of testimony, tables of stone, written with the finger of god. 32:1 and when the people saw that moses delayed to come down out of the mount, the people gathered themselves together unto aaron, and said unto him, up, make us gods, which shall go before us; for as for this moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of egypt, we wot not what is become of him. 32:2 and aaron said unto them, break off the golden earrings, which are in the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of your daughters, and bring them unto me. 32:3 and all the people brake off the golden earrings which were in their ears, and brought them unto aaron. 32:4 and he received them at their hand, and fashioned it with a graving tool, after he had made it a molten calf: and they said, these be thy gods, o israel, which brought thee up out of the land of egypt. 32:5 and when aaron saw it, he built an altar before it; and aaron made proclamation, and said, to morrow is a feast to the lord. 32:6 and they rose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt offerings, and brought peace offerings; and the people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play. 32:7 and the lord said unto moses, go, get thee down; for thy people, which thou broughtest out of the land of egypt, have corrupted themselves: 32:8 they have turned aside quickly out of the way which i commanded them: they have made them a molten calf, and have worshipped it, and have sacrificed thereunto, and said, these be thy gods, o israel, which have brought thee up out of the land of egypt. 32:9 and the lord said unto moses, i have seen this people, and, behold, it is a stiffnecked people: 32:10 now therefore let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that i may consume them: and i will make of thee a great nation. 32:11 and moses besought the lord his god, and said, lord, why doth thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou hast brought forth out of the land of egypt with great power, and with a mighty hand? 32:12 wherefore should the egyptians speak, and say, for mischief did he bring them out, to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth? turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against thy people. 32:13 remember abraham, isaac, and israel, thy servants, to whom thou swarest by thine own self, and saidst unto them, i will multiply your seed as the stars of heaven, and all this land that i have spoken of will i give unto your seed, and they shall inherit it for ever. 32:14 and the lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people. 32:15 and moses turned, and went down from the mount, and the two tables of the testimony were in his hand: the tables were written on both their sides; on the one side and on the other were they written. 32:16 and the tables were the work of god, and the writing was the writing of god, graven upon the tables. 32:17 and when joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted, he said unto moses, there is a noise of war in the camp. 32:18 and he said, it is not the voice of them that shout for mastery, neither is it the voice of them that cry for being overcome: but the noise of them that sing do i hear. 32:19 and it came to pass, as soon as he came nigh unto the camp, that he saw the calf, and the dancing: and moses’ anger waxed hot, and he cast the tables out of his hands, and brake them beneath the mount. 32:20 and he took the calf which they had made, and burnt it in the fire, and ground it to powder, and strawed it upon the water, and made the children of israel drink of it. 32:21 and moses said unto aaron, what did this people unto thee, that thou hast brought so great a sin upon them? 32:22 and aaron said, let not the anger of my lord wax hot: thou knowest the people, that they are set on mischief. 32:23 for they said unto me, make us gods, which shall go before us: for as for this moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of egypt, we wot not what is become of him. 32:24 and i said unto them, whosoever hath any gold, let them break it off. so they gave it me: then i cast it into the fire, and there came out this calf. 32:25 and when moses saw that the people were naked; (for aaron had made them naked unto their shame among their enemies:) 32:26 then moses stood in the gate of the camp, and said, who is on the lord’s side? let him come unto me. and all the sons of levi gathered themselves together unto him. 32:27 and he said unto them, thus saith the lord god of israel, put every man his sword by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate throughout the camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his companion, and every man his neighbour. 32:28 and the children of levi did according to the word of moses: and there fell of the people that day about three thousand men. 32:29 for moses had said, consecrate yourselves today to the lord, even every man upon his son, and upon his brother; that he may bestow upon you a blessing this day. 32:30 and it came to pass on the morrow, that moses said unto the people, ye have sinned a great sin: and now i will go up unto the lord; peradventure i shall make an atonement for your sin. 32:31 and moses returned unto the lord, and said, oh, this people have sinned a great sin, and have made them gods of gold. 32:32 yet now, if thou wilt forgive their sin--; and if not, blot me, i pray thee, out of thy book which thou hast written. 32:33 and the lord said unto moses, whosoever hath sinned against me, him will i blot out of my book. 32:34 therefore now go, lead the people unto the place of which i have spoken unto thee: behold, mine angel shall go before thee: nevertheless in the day when i visit i will visit their sin upon them. 32:35 and the lord plagued the people, because they made the calf, which aaron made. 33:1 and the lord said unto moses, depart, and go up hence, thou and the people which thou hast brought up out of the land of egypt, unto the land which i sware unto abraham, to isaac, and to jacob, saying, unto thy seed will i give it: 33:2 and i will send an angel before thee; and i will drive out the canaanite, the amorite, and the hittite, and the perizzite, the hivite, and the jebusite: 33:3 unto a land flowing with milk and honey: for i will not go up in the midst of thee; for thou art a stiffnecked people: lest i consume thee in the way. 33:4 and when the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned: and no man did put on him his ornaments. 33:5 for the lord had said unto moses, say unto the children of israel, ye are a stiffnecked people: i will come up into the midst of thee in a moment, and consume thee: therefore now put off thy ornaments from thee, that i may know what to do unto thee. 33:6 and the children of israel stripped themselves of their ornaments by the mount horeb. 33:7 and moses took the tabernacle, and pitched it without the camp, afar off from the camp, and called it the tabernacle of the congregation. and it came to pass, that every one which sought the lord went out unto the tabernacle of the congregation, which was without the camp. 33:8 and it came to pass, when moses went out unto the tabernacle, that all the people rose up, and stood every man at his tent door, and looked after moses, until he was gone into the tabernacle. 33:9 and it came to pass, as moses entered into the tabernacle, the cloudy pillar descended, and stood at the door of the tabernacle, and the lord talked with moses. 33:10 and all the people saw the cloudy pillar stand at the tabernacle door: and all the people rose up and worshipped, every man in his tent door. 33:11 and the lord spake unto moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend. and he turned again into the camp: but his servant joshua, the son of nun, a young man, departed not out of the tabernacle. 33:12 and moses said unto the lord, see, thou sayest unto me, bring up this people: and thou hast not let me know whom thou wilt send with me. yet thou hast said, i know thee by name, and thou hast also found grace in my sight. 33:13 now therefore, i pray thee, if i have found grace in thy sight, shew me now thy way, that i may know thee, that i may find grace in thy sight: and consider that this nation is thy people. 33:14 and he said, my presence shall go with thee, and i will give thee rest. 33:15 and he said unto him, if thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence. 33:16 for wherein shall it be known here that i and thy people have found grace in thy sight? is it not in that thou goest with us? so shall we be separated, i and thy people, from all the people that are upon the face of the earth. 33:17 and the lord said unto moses, i will do this thing also that thou hast spoken: for thou hast found grace in my sight, and i know thee by name. 33:18 and he said, i beseech thee, shew me thy glory. 33:19 and he said, i will make all my goodness pass before thee, and i will proclaim the name of the lord before thee; and will be gracious to whom i will be gracious, and will shew mercy on whom i will shew mercy. 33:20 and he said, thou canst not see my face: for there shall no man see me, and live. 33:21 and the lord said, behold, there is a place by me, and thou shalt stand upon a rock: 33:22 and it shall come to pass, while my glory passeth by, that i will put thee in a clift of the rock, and will cover thee with my hand while i pass by: 33:23 and i will take away mine hand, and thou shalt see my back parts: but my face shall not be seen. 34:1 and the lord said unto moses, hew thee two tables of stone like unto the first: and i will write upon these tables the words that were in the first tables, which thou brakest. 34:2 and be ready in the morning, and come up in the morning unto mount sinai, and present thyself there to me in the top of the mount. 34:3 and no man shall come up with thee, neither let any man be seen throughout all the mount; neither let the flocks nor herds feed before that mount. 34:4 and he hewed two tables of stone like unto the first; and moses rose up early in the morning, and went up unto mount sinai, as the lord had commanded him, and took in his hand the two tables of stone. 34:5 and the lord descended in the cloud, and stood with him there, and proclaimed the name of the lord. 34:6 and the lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, the lord, the lord god, merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, 34:7 keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon the children’s children, unto the third and to the fourth generation. 34:8 and moses made haste, and bowed his head toward the earth, and worshipped. 34:9 and he said, if now i have found grace in thy sight, o lord, let my lord, i pray thee, go among us; for it is a stiffnecked people; and pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for thine inheritance. 34:10 and he said, behold, i make a covenant: before all thy people i will do marvels, such as have not been done in all the earth, nor in any nation: and all the people among which thou art shall see the work of the lord: for it is a terrible thing that i will do with thee. 34:11 observe thou that which i command thee this day: behold, i drive out before thee the amorite, and the canaanite, and the hittite, and the perizzite, and the hivite, and the jebusite. 34:12 take heed to thyself, lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land whither thou goest, lest it be for a snare in the midst of thee: 34:13 but ye shall destroy their altars, break their images, and cut down their groves: 34:14 for thou shalt worship no other god: for the lord, whose name is jealous, is a jealous god: 34:15 lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, and they go a whoring after their gods, and do sacrifice unto their gods, and one call thee, and thou eat of his sacrifice; 34:16 and thou take of their daughters unto thy sons, and their daughters go a whoring after their gods, and make thy sons go a whoring after their gods. 34:17 thou shalt make thee no molten gods. 34:18 the feast of unleavened bread shalt thou keep. seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, as i commanded thee, in the time of the month abib: for in the month abib thou camest out from egypt. 34:19 all that openeth the matrix is mine; and every firstling among thy cattle, whether ox or sheep, that is male. 34:20 but the firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb: and if thou redeem him not, then shalt thou break his neck. all the firstborn of thy sons thou shalt redeem. and none shall appear before me empty. 34:21 six days thou shalt work, but on the seventh day thou shalt rest: in earing time and in harvest thou shalt rest. 34:22 and thou shalt observe the feast of weeks, of the firstfruits of wheat harvest, and the feast of ingathering at the year’s end. 34:23 thrice in the year shall all your menchildren appear before the lord god, the god of israel. 34:24 for i will cast out the nations before thee, and enlarge thy borders: neither shall any man desire thy land, when thou shalt go up to appear before the lord thy god thrice in the year. 34:25 thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leaven; neither shall the sacrifice of the feast of the passover be left unto the morning. 34:26 the first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring unto the house of the lord thy god. thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother’s milk. 34:27 and the lord said unto moses, write thou these words: for after the tenor of these words i have made a covenant with thee and with israel. 34:28 and he was there with the lord forty days and forty nights; he did neither eat bread, nor drink water. and he wrote upon the tables the words of the covenant, the ten commandments. 34:29 and it came to pass, when moses came down from mount sinai with the two tables of testimony in moses’ hand, when he came down from the mount, that moses wist not that the skin of his face shone while he talked with him. 34:30 and when aaron and all the children of israel saw moses, behold, the skin of his face shone; and they were afraid to come nigh him. 34:31 and moses called unto them; and aaron and all the rulers of the congregation returned unto him: and moses talked with them. 34:32 and afterward all the children of israel came nigh: and he gave them in commandment all that the lord had spoken with him in mount sinai. 34:33 and till moses had done speaking with them, he put a vail on his face. 34:34 but when moses went in before the lord to speak with him, he took the vail off, until he came out. and he came out, and spake unto the children of israel that which he was commanded. 34:35 and the children of israel saw the face of moses, that the skin of moses’ face shone: and moses put the vail upon his face again, until he went in to speak with him. 35:1 and moses gathered all the congregation of the children of israel together, and said unto them, these are the words which the lord hath commanded, that ye should do them. 35:2 six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day there shall be to you an holy day, a sabbath of rest to the lord: whosoever doeth work therein shall be put to death. 35:3 ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon the sabbath day. 35:4 and moses spake unto all the congregation of the children of israel, saying, this is the thing which the lord commanded, saying, 35:5 take ye from among you an offering unto the lord: whosoever is of a willing heart, let him bring it, an offering of the lord; gold, and silver, and brass, 35:6 and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats’ hair, 35:7 and rams’ skins dyed red, and badgers’ skins, and shittim wood, 35:8 and oil for the light, and spices for anointing oil, and for the sweet incense, 35:9 and onyx stones, and stones to be set for the ephod, and for the breastplate. 35:10 and every wise hearted among you shall come, and make all that the lord hath commanded; 35:11 the tabernacle, his tent, and his covering, his taches, and his boards, his bars, his pillars, and his sockets, 35:12 the ark, and the staves thereof, with the mercy seat, and the vail of the covering, 35:13 the table, and his staves, and all his vessels, and the shewbread, 35:14 the candlestick also for the light, and his furniture, and his lamps, with the oil for the light, 35:15 and the incense altar, and his staves, and the anointing oil, and the sweet incense, and the hanging for the door at the entering in of the tabernacle, 35:16 the altar of burnt offering, with his brasen grate, his staves, and all his vessels, the laver and his foot, 35:17 the hangings of the court, his pillars, and their sockets, and the hanging for the door of the court, 35:18 the pins of the tabernacle, and the pins of the court, and their cords, 35:19 the cloths of service, to do service in the holy place, the holy garments for aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest’s office. 35:20 and all the congregation of the children of israel departed from the presence of moses. 35:21 and they came, every one whose heart stirred him up, and every one whom his spirit made willing, and they brought the lord’s offering to the work of the tabernacle of the congregation, and for all his service, and for the holy garments. 35:22 and they came, both men and women, as many as were willing hearted, and brought bracelets, and earrings, and rings, and tablets, all jewels of gold: and every man that offered offered an offering of gold unto the lord. 35:23 and every man, with whom was found blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats’ hair, and red skins of rams, and badgers’ skins, brought them. 35:24 every one that did offer an offering of silver and brass brought the lord’s offering: and every man, with whom was found shittim wood for any work of the service, brought it. 35:25 and all the women that were wise hearted did spin with their hands, and brought that which they had spun, both of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, and of fine linen. 35:26 and all the women whose heart stirred them up in wisdom spun goats’ hair. 35:27 and the rulers brought onyx stones, and stones to be set, for the ephod, and for the breastplate; 35:28 and spice, and oil for the light, and for the anointing oil, and for the sweet incense. 35:29 the children of israel brought a willing offering unto the lord, every man and woman, whose heart made them willing to bring for all manner of work, which the lord had commanded to be made by the hand of moses. 35:30 and moses said unto the children of israel, see, the lord hath called by name bezaleel the son of uri, the son of hur, of the tribe of judah; 35:31 and he hath filled him with the spirit of god, in wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship; 35:32 and to devise curious works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass, 35:33 and in the cutting of stones, to set them, and in carving of wood, to make any manner of cunning work. 35:34 and he hath put in his heart that he may teach, both he, and aholiab, the son of ahisamach, of the tribe of dan. 35:35 them hath he filled with wisdom of heart, to work all manner of work, of the engraver, and of the cunning workman, and of the embroiderer, in blue, and in purple, in scarlet, and in fine linen, and of the weaver, even of them that do any work, and of those that devise cunning work. 36:1 then wrought bezaleel and aholiab, and every wise hearted man, in whom the lord put wisdom and understanding to know how to work all manner of work for the service of the sanctuary, according to all that the lord had commanded. 36:2 and moses called bezaleel and aholiab, and every wise hearted man, in whose heart the lord had put wisdom, even every one whose heart stirred him up to come unto the work to do it: 36:3 and they received of moses all the offering, which the children of israel had brought for the work of the service of the sanctuary, to make it withal. and they brought yet unto him free offerings every morning. 36:4 and all the wise men, that wrought all the work of the sanctuary, came every man from his work which they made; 36:5 and they spake unto moses, saying, the people bring much more than enough for the service of the work, which the lord commanded to make. 36:6 and moses gave commandment, and they caused it to be proclaimed throughout the camp, saying, let neither man nor woman make any more work for the offering of the sanctuary. so the people were restrained from bringing. 36:7 for the stuff they had was sufficient for all the work to make it, and too much. 36:8 and every wise hearted man among them that wrought the work of the tabernacle made ten curtains of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet: with cherubims of cunning work made he them. 36:9 the length of one curtain was twenty and eight cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: the curtains were all of one size. 36:10 and he coupled the five curtains one unto another: and the other five curtains he coupled one unto another. 36:11 and he made loops of blue on the edge of one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling: likewise he made in the uttermost side of another curtain, in the coupling of the second. 36:12 fifty loops made he in one curtain, and fifty loops made he in the edge of the curtain which was in the coupling of the second: the loops held one curtain to another. 36:13 and he made fifty taches of gold, and coupled the curtains one unto another with the taches: so it became one tabernacle. 36:14 and he made curtains of goats’ hair for the tent over the tabernacle: eleven curtains he made them. 36:15 the length of one curtain was thirty cubits, and four cubits was the breadth of one curtain: the eleven curtains were of one size. 36:16 and he coupled five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves. 36:17 and he made fifty loops upon the uttermost edge of the curtain in the coupling, and fifty loops made he upon the edge of the curtain which coupleth the second. 36:18 and he made fifty taches of brass to couple the tent together, that it might be one. 36:19 and he made a covering for the tent of rams’ skins dyed red, and a covering of badgers’ skins above that. 36:20 and he made boards for the tabernacle of shittim wood, standing up. 36:21 the length of a board was ten cubits, and the breadth of a board one cubit and a half. 36:22 one board had two tenons, equally distant one from another: thus did he make for all the boards of the tabernacle. 36:23 and he made boards for the tabernacle; twenty boards for the south side southward: 36:24 and forty sockets of silver he made under the twenty boards; two sockets under one board for his two tenons, and two sockets under another board for his two tenons. 36:25 and for the other side of the tabernacle, which is toward the north corner, he made twenty boards, 36:26 and their forty sockets of silver; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board. 36:27 and for the sides of the tabernacle westward he made six boards. 36:28 and two boards made he for the corners of the tabernacle in the two sides. 36:29 and they were coupled beneath, and coupled together at the head thereof, to one ring: thus he did to both of them in both the corners. 36:30 and there were eight boards; and their sockets were sixteen sockets of silver, under every board two sockets. 36:31 and he made bars of shittim wood; five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle, 36:32 and five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the tabernacle for the sides westward. 36:33 and he made the middle bar to shoot through the boards from the one end to the other. 36:34 and he overlaid the boards with gold, and made their rings of gold to be places for the bars, and overlaid the bars with gold. 36:35 and he made a vail of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen: with cherubims made he it of cunning work. 36:36 and he made thereunto four pillars of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold: their hooks were of gold; and he cast for them four sockets of silver. 36:37 and he made an hanging for the tabernacle door of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, of needlework; 36:38 and the five pillars of it with their hooks: and he overlaid their chapiters and their fillets with gold: but their five sockets were of brass. 37:1 and bezaleel made the ark of shittim wood: two cubits and a half was the length of it, and a cubit and a half the breadth of it, and a cubit and a half the height of it: 37:2 and he overlaid it with pure gold within and without, and made a crown of gold to it round about. 37:3 and he cast for it four rings of gold, to be set by the four corners of it; even two rings upon the one side of it, and two rings upon the other side of it. 37:4 and he made staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold. 37:5 and he put the staves into the rings by the sides of the ark, to bear the ark. 37:6 and he made the mercy seat of pure gold: two cubits and a half was the length thereof, and one cubit and a half the breadth thereof. 37:7 and he made two cherubims of gold, beaten out of one piece made he them, on the two ends of the mercy seat; 37:8 one cherub on the end on this side, and another cherub on the other end on that side: out of the mercy seat made he the cherubims on the two ends thereof. 37:9 and the cherubims spread out their wings on high, and covered with their wings over the mercy seat, with their faces one to another; even to the mercy seatward were the faces of the cherubims. 37:10 and he made the table of shittim wood: two cubits was the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof: 37:11 and he overlaid it with pure gold, and made thereunto a crown of gold round about. 37:12 also he made thereunto a border of an handbreadth round about; and made a crown of gold for the border thereof round about. 37:13 and he cast for it four rings of gold, and put the rings upon the four corners that were in the four feet thereof. 37:14 over against the border were the rings, the places for the staves to bear the table. 37:15 and he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold, to bear the table. 37:16 and he made the vessels which were upon the table, his dishes, and his spoons, and his bowls, and his covers to cover withal, of pure gold. 37:17 and he made the candlestick of pure gold: of beaten work made he the candlestick; his shaft, and his branch, his bowls, his knops, and his flowers, were of the same: 37:18 and six branches going out of the sides thereof; three branches of the candlestick out of the one side thereof, and three branches of the candlestick out of the other side thereof: 37:19 three bowls made after the fashion of almonds in one branch, a knop and a flower; and three bowls made like almonds in another branch, a knop and a flower: so throughout the six branches going out of the candlestick. 37:20 and in the candlestick were four bowls made like almonds, his knops, and his flowers: 37:21 and a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, according to the six branches going out of it. 37:22 their knops and their branches were of the same: all of it was one beaten work of pure gold. 37:23 and he made his seven lamps, and his snuffers, and his snuffdishes, of pure gold. 37:24 of a talent of pure gold made he it, and all the vessels thereof. 37:25 and he made the incense altar of shittim wood: the length of it was a cubit, and the breadth of it a cubit; it was foursquare; and two cubits was the height of it; the horns thereof were of the same. 37:26 and he overlaid it with pure gold, both the top of it, and the sides thereof round about, and the horns of it: also he made unto it a crown of gold round about. 37:27 and he made two rings of gold for it under the crown thereof, by the two corners of it, upon the two sides thereof, to be places for the staves to bear it withal. 37:28 and he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold. 37:29 and he made the holy anointing oil, and the pure incense of sweet spices, according to the work of the apothecary. 38:1 and he made the altar of burnt offering of shittim wood: five cubits was the length thereof, and five cubits the breadth thereof; it was foursquare; and three cubits the height thereof. 38:2 and he made the horns thereof on the four corners of it; the horns thereof were of the same: and he overlaid it with brass. 38:3 and he made all the vessels of the altar, the pots, and the shovels, and the basons, and the fleshhooks, and the firepans: all the vessels thereof made he of brass. 38:4 and he made for the altar a brasen grate of network under the compass thereof beneath unto the midst of it. 38:5 and he cast four rings for the four ends of the grate of brass, to be places for the staves. 38:6 and he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with brass. 38:7 and he put the staves into the rings on the sides of the altar, to bear it withal; he made the altar hollow with boards. 38:8 and he made the laver of brass, and the foot of it of brass, of the lookingglasses of the women assembling, which assembled at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. 38:9 and he made the court: on the south side southward the hangings of the court were of fine twined linen, an hundred cubits: 38:10 their pillars were twenty, and their brasen sockets twenty; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets were of silver. 38:11 and for the north side the hangings were an hundred cubits, their pillars were twenty, and their sockets of brass twenty; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver. 38:12 and for the west side were hangings of fifty cubits, their pillars ten, and their sockets ten; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver. 38:13 and for the east side eastward fifty cubits. 38:14 the hangings of the one side of the gate were fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their sockets three. 38:15 and for the other side of the court gate, on this hand and that hand, were hangings of fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their sockets three. 38:16 all the hangings of the court round about were of fine twined linen. 38:17 and the sockets for the pillars were of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver; and the overlaying of their chapiters of silver; and all the pillars of the court were filleted with silver. 38:18 and the hanging for the gate of the court was needlework, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen: and twenty cubits was the length, and the height in the breadth was five cubits, answerable to the hangings of the court. 38:19 and their pillars were four, and their sockets of brass four; their hooks of silver, and the overlaying of their chapiters and their fillets of silver. 38:20 and all the pins of the tabernacle, and of the court round about, were of brass. 38:21 this is the sum of the tabernacle, even of the tabernacle of testimony, as it was counted, according to the commandment of moses, for the service of the levites, by the hand of ithamar, son to aaron the priest. 38:22 and bezaleel the son of uri, the son of hur, of the tribe of judah, made all that the lord commanded moses. 38:23 and with him was aholiab, son of ahisamach, of the tribe of dan, an engraver, and a cunning workman, and an embroiderer in blue, and in purple, and in scarlet, and fine linen. 38:24 all the gold that was occupied for the work in all the work of the holy place, even the gold of the offering, was twenty and nine talents, and seven hundred and thirty shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary. 38:25 and the silver of them that were numbered of the congregation was an hundred talents, and a thousand seven hundred and threescore and fifteen shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary: 38:26 a bekah for every man, that is, half a shekel, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for every one that went to be numbered, from twenty years old and upward, for six hundred thousand and three thousand and five hundred and fifty men. 38:27 and of the hundred talents of silver were cast the sockets of the sanctuary, and the sockets of the vail; an hundred sockets of the hundred talents, a talent for a socket. 38:28 and of the thousand seven hundred seventy and five shekels he made hooks for the pillars, and overlaid their chapiters, and filleted them. 38:29 and the brass of the offering was seventy talents, and two thousand and four hundred shekels. 38:30 and therewith he made the sockets to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and the brasen altar, and the brasen grate for it, and all the vessels of the altar, 38:31 and the sockets of the court round about, and the sockets of the court gate, and all the pins of the tabernacle, and all the pins of the court round about. 39:1 and of the blue, and purple, and scarlet, they made cloths of service, to do service in the holy place, and made the holy garments for aaron; as the lord commanded moses. 39:2 and he made the ephod of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen. 39:3 and they did beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it into wires, to work it in the blue, and in the purple, and in the scarlet, and in the fine linen, with cunning work. 39:4 they made shoulderpieces for it, to couple it together: by the two edges was it coupled together. 39:5 and the curious girdle of his ephod, that was upon it, was of the same, according to the work thereof; of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen; as the lord commanded moses. 39:6 and they wrought onyx stones inclosed in ouches of gold, graven, as signets are graven, with the names of the children of israel. 39:7 and he put them on the shoulders of the ephod, that they should be stones for a memorial to the children of israel; as the lord commanded moses. 39:8 and he made the breastplate of cunning work, like the work of the ephod; of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen. 39:9 it was foursquare; they made the breastplate double: a span was the length thereof, and a span the breadth thereof, being doubled. 39:10 and they set in it four rows of stones: the first row was a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: this was the first row. 39:11 and the second row, an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond. 39:12 and the third row, a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst. 39:13 and the fourth row, a beryl, an onyx, and a jasper: they were inclosed in ouches of gold in their inclosings. 39:14 and the stones were according to the names of the children of israel, twelve, according to their names, like the engravings of a signet, every one with his name, according to the twelve tribes. 39:15 and they made upon the breastplate chains at the ends, of wreathen work of pure gold. 39:16 and they made two ouches of gold, and two gold rings; and put the two rings in the two ends of the breastplate. 39:17 and they put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings on the ends of the breastplate. 39:18 and the two ends of the two wreathen chains they fastened in the two ouches, and put them on the shoulderpieces of the ephod, before it. 39:19 and they made two rings of gold, and put them on the two ends of the breastplate, upon the border of it, which was on the side of the ephod inward. 39:20 and they made two other golden rings, and put them on the two sides of the ephod underneath, toward the forepart of it, over against the other coupling thereof, above the curious girdle of the ephod. 39:21 and they did bind the breastplate by his rings unto the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it might be above the curious girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate might not be loosed from the ephod; as the lord commanded moses. 39:22 and he made the robe of the ephod of woven work, all of blue. 39:23 and there was an hole in the midst of the robe, as the hole of an habergeon, with a band round about the hole, that it should not rend. 39:24 and they made upon the hems of the robe pomegranates of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen. 39:25 and they made bells of pure gold, and put the bells between the pomegranates upon the hem of the robe, round about between the pomegranates; 39:26 a bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate, round about the hem of the robe to minister in; as the lord commanded moses. 39:27 and they made coats of fine linen of woven work for aaron, and for his sons, 39:28 and a mitre of fine linen, and goodly bonnets of fine linen, and linen breeches of fine twined linen, 39:29 and a girdle of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, of needlework; as the lord commanded moses. 39:30 and they made the plate of the holy crown of pure gold, and wrote upon it a writing, like to the engravings of a signet, holiness to the lord. 39:31 and they tied unto it a lace of blue, to fasten it on high upon the mitre; as the lord commanded moses. 39:32 thus was all the work of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation finished: and the children of israel did according to all that the lord commanded moses, so did they. 39:33 and they brought the tabernacle unto moses, the tent, and all his furniture, his taches, his boards, his bars, and his pillars, and his sockets, 39:34 and the covering of rams’ skins dyed red, and the covering of badgers’ skins, and the vail of the covering, 39:35 the ark of the testimony, and the staves thereof, and the mercy seat, 39:36 the table, and all the vessels thereof, and the shewbread, 39:37 the pure candlestick, with the lamps thereof, even with the lamps to be set in order, and all the vessels thereof, and the oil for light, 39:38 and the golden altar, and the anointing oil, and the sweet incense, and the hanging for the tabernacle door, 39:39 the brasen altar, and his grate of brass, his staves, and all his vessels, the laver and his foot, 39:40 the hangings of the court, his pillars, and his sockets, and the hanging for the court gate, his cords, and his pins, and all the vessels of the service of the tabernacle, for the tent of the congregation, 39:41 the cloths of service to do service in the holy place, and the holy garments for aaron the priest, and his sons’ garments, to minister in the priest’s office. 39:42 according to all that the lord commanded moses, so the children of israel made all the work. 39:43 and moses did look upon all the work, and, behold, they had done it as the lord had commanded, even so had they done it: and moses blessed them. 40:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 40:2 on the first day of the first month shalt thou set up the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation. 40:3 and thou shalt put therein the ark of the testimony, and cover the ark with the vail. 40:4 and thou shalt bring in the table, and set in order the things that are to be set in order upon it; and thou shalt bring in the candlestick, and light the lamps thereof. 40:5 and thou shalt set the altar of gold for the incense before the ark of the testimony, and put the hanging of the door to the tabernacle. 40:6 and thou shalt set the altar of the burnt offering before the door of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation. 40:7 and thou shalt set the laver between the tent of the congregation and the altar, and shalt put water therein. 40:8 and thou shalt set up the court round about, and hang up the hanging at the court gate. 40:9 and thou shalt take the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle, and all that is therein, and shalt hallow it, and all the vessels thereof: and it shall be holy. 40:10 and thou shalt anoint the altar of the burnt offering, and all his vessels, and sanctify the altar: and it shall be an altar most holy. 40:11 and thou shalt anoint the laver and his foot, and sanctify it. 40:12 and thou shalt bring aaron and his sons unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and wash them with water. 40:13 and thou shalt put upon aaron the holy garments, and anoint him, and sanctify him; that he may minister unto me in the priest’s office. 40:14 and thou shalt bring his sons, and clothe them with coats: 40:15 and thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that they may minister unto me in the priest’s office: for their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations. 40:16 thus did moses: according to all that the lord commanded him, so did he. 40:17 and it came to pass in the first month in the second year, on the first day of the month, that the tabernacle was reared up. 40:18 and moses reared up the tabernacle, and fastened his sockets, and set up the boards thereof, and put in the bars thereof, and reared up his pillars. 40:19 and he spread abroad the tent over the tabernacle, and put the covering of the tent above upon it; as the lord commanded moses. 40:20 and he took and put the testimony into the ark, and set the staves on the ark, and put the mercy seat above upon the ark: 40:21 and he brought the ark into the tabernacle, and set up the vail of the covering, and covered the ark of the testimony; as the lord commanded moses. 40:22 and he put the table in the tent of the congregation, upon the side of the tabernacle northward, without the vail. 40:23 and he set the bread in order upon it before the lord; as the lord had commanded moses. 40:24 and he put the candlestick in the tent of the congregation, over against the table, on the side of the tabernacle southward. 40:25 and he lighted the lamps before the lord; as the lord commanded moses. 40:26 and he put the golden altar in the tent of the congregation before the vail: 40:27 and he burnt sweet incense thereon; as the lord commanded moses. 40:28 and he set up the hanging at the door of the tabernacle. 40:29 and he put the altar of burnt offering by the door of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation, and offered upon it the burnt offering and the meat offering; as the lord commanded moses. 40:30 and he set the laver between the tent of the congregation and the altar, and put water there, to wash withal. 40:31 and moses and aaron and his sons washed their hands and their feet thereat: 40:32 when they went into the tent of the congregation, and when they came near unto the altar, they washed; as the lord commanded moses. 40:33 and he reared up the court round about the tabernacle and the altar, and set up the hanging of the court gate. so moses finished the work. 40:34 then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory of the lord filled the tabernacle. 40:35 and moses was not able to enter into the tent of the congregation, because the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the lord filled the tabernacle. 40:36 and when the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the children of israel went onward in all their journeys: 40:37 but if the cloud were not taken up, then they journeyed not till the day that it was taken up. 40:38 for the cloud of the lord was upon the tabernacle by day, and fire was on it by night, in the sight of all the house of israel, throughout all their journeys. the third book of moses: called leviticus 1:1 and the lord called unto moses, and spake unto him out of the tabernacle of the congregation, saying, 1:2 speak unto the children of israel, and say unto them, if any man of you bring an offering unto the lord, ye shall bring your offering of the cattle, even of the herd, and of the flock. 1:3 if his offering be a burnt sacrifice of the herd, let him offer a male without blemish: he shall offer it of his own voluntary will at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before the lord. 1:4 and he shall put his hand upon the head of the burnt offering; and it shall be accepted for him to make atonement for him. 1:5 and he shall kill the bullock before the lord: and the priests, aaron’s sons, shall bring the blood, and sprinkle the blood round about upon the altar that is by the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. 1:6 and he shall flay the burnt offering, and cut it into his pieces. 1:7 and the sons of aaron the priest shall put fire upon the altar, and lay the wood in order upon the fire: 1:8 and the priests, aaron’s sons, shall lay the parts, the head, and the fat, in order upon the wood that is on the fire which is upon the altar: 1:9 but his inwards and his legs shall he wash in water: and the priest shall burn all on the altar, to be a burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord. 1:10 and if his offering be of the flocks, namely, of the sheep, or of the goats, for a burnt sacrifice; he shall bring it a male without blemish. 1:11 and he shall kill it on the side of the altar northward before the lord: and the priests, aaron’s sons, shall sprinkle his blood round about upon the altar. 1:12 and he shall cut it into his pieces, with his head and his fat: and the priest shall lay them in order on the wood that is on the fire which is upon the altar: 1:13 but he shall wash the inwards and the legs with water: and the priest shall bring it all, and burn it upon the altar: it is a burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord. 1:14 and if the burnt sacrifice for his offering to the lord be of fowls, then he shall bring his offering of turtledoves, or of young pigeons. 1:15 and the priest shall bring it unto the altar, and wring off his head, and burn it on the altar; and the blood thereof shall be wrung out at the side of the altar: 1:16 and he shall pluck away his crop with his feathers, and cast it beside the altar on the east part, by the place of the ashes: 1:17 and he shall cleave it with the wings thereof, but shall not divide it asunder: and the priest shall burn it upon the altar, upon the wood that is upon the fire: it is a burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord. 2:1 and when any will offer a meat offering unto the lord, his offering shall be of fine flour; and he shall pour oil upon it, and put frankincense thereon: 2:2 and he shall bring it to aaron’s sons the priests: and he shall take thereout his handful of the flour thereof, and of the oil thereof, with all the frankincense thereof; and the priest shall burn the memorial of it upon the altar, to be an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord: 2:3 and the remnant of the meat offering shall be aaron’s and his sons’: it is a thing most holy of the offerings of the lord made by fire. 2:4 and if thou bring an oblation of a meat offering baken in the oven, it shall be unleavened cakes of fine flour mingled with oil, or unleavened wafers anointed with oil. 2:5 and if thy oblation be a meat offering baken in a pan, it shall be of fine flour unleavened, mingled with oil. 2:6 thou shalt part it in pieces, and pour oil thereon: it is a meat offering. 2:7 and if thy oblation be a meat offering baken in the fryingpan, it shall be made of fine flour with oil. 2:8 and thou shalt bring the meat offering that is made of these things unto the lord: and when it is presented unto the priest, he shall bring it unto the altar. 2:9 and the priest shall take from the meat offering a memorial thereof, and shall burn it upon the altar: it is an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord. 2:10 and that which is left of the meat offering shall be aaron’s and his sons’: it is a thing most holy of the offerings of the lord made by fire. 2:11 no meat offering, which ye shall bring unto the lord, shall be made with leaven: for ye shall burn no leaven, nor any honey, in any offering of the lord made by fire. 2:12 as for the oblation of the firstfruits, ye shall offer them unto the lord: but they shall not be burnt on the altar for a sweet savour. 2:13 and every oblation of thy meat offering shalt thou season with salt; neither shalt thou suffer the salt of the covenant of thy god to be lacking from thy meat offering: with all thine offerings thou shalt offer salt. 2:14 and if thou offer a meat offering of thy firstfruits unto the lord, thou shalt offer for the meat offering of thy firstfruits green ears of corn dried by the fire, even corn beaten out of full ears. 2:15 and thou shalt put oil upon it, and lay frankincense thereon: it is a meat offering. 2:16 and the priest shall burn the memorial of it, part of the beaten corn thereof, and part of the oil thereof, with all the frankincense thereof: it is an offering made by fire unto the lord. 3:1 and if his oblation be a sacrifice of peace offering, if he offer it of the herd; whether it be a male or female, he shall offer it without blemish before the lord. 3:2 and he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering, and kill it at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and aaron’s sons the priests shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about. 3:3 and he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering an offering made by fire unto the lord; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards, 3:4 and the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away. 3:5 and aaron’s sons shall burn it on the altar upon the burnt sacrifice, which is upon the wood that is on the fire: it is an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord. 3:6 and if his offering for a sacrifice of peace offering unto the lord be of the flock; male or female, he shall offer it without blemish. 3:7 if he offer a lamb for his offering, then shall he offer it before the lord. 3:8 and he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering, and kill it before the tabernacle of the congregation: and aaron’s sons shall sprinkle the blood thereof round about upon the altar. 3:9 and he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering an offering made by fire unto the lord; the fat thereof, and the whole rump, it shall he take off hard by the backbone; and the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards, 3:10 and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away. 3:11 and the priest shall burn it upon the altar: it is the food of the offering made by fire unto the lord. 3:12 and if his offering be a goat, then he shall offer it before the lord. 3:13 and he shall lay his hand upon the head of it, and kill it before the tabernacle of the congregation: and the sons of aaron shall sprinkle the blood thereof upon the altar round about. 3:14 and he shall offer thereof his offering, even an offering made by fire unto the lord; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards, 3:15 and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away. 3:16 and the priest shall burn them upon the altar: it is the food of the offering made by fire for a sweet savour: all the fat is the lord’s. 3:17 it shall be a perpetual statute for your generations throughout all your dwellings, that ye eat neither fat nor blood. 4:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 4:2 speak unto the children of israel, saying, if a soul shall sin through ignorance against any of the commandments of the lord concerning things which ought not to be done, and shall do against any of them: 4:3 if the priest that is anointed do sin according to the sin of the people; then let him bring for his sin, which he hath sinned, a young bullock without blemish unto the lord for a sin offering. 4:4 and he shall bring the bullock unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before the lord; and shall lay his hand upon the bullock’s head, and kill the bullock before the lord. 4:5 and the priest that is anointed shall take of the bullock’s blood, and bring it to the tabernacle of the congregation: 4:6 and the priest shall dip his finger in the blood, and sprinkle of the blood seven times before the lord, before the vail of the sanctuary. 4:7 and the priest shall put some of the blood upon the horns of the altar of sweet incense before the lord, which is in the tabernacle of the congregation; and shall pour all the blood of the bullock at the bottom of the altar of the burnt offering, which is at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. 4:8 and he shall take off from it all the fat of the bullock for the sin offering; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards, 4:9 and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away, 4:10 as it was taken off from the bullock of the sacrifice of peace offerings: and the priest shall burn them upon the altar of the burnt offering. 4:11 and the skin of the bullock, and all his flesh, with his head, and with his legs, and his inwards, and his dung, 4:12 even the whole bullock shall he carry forth without the camp unto a clean place, where the ashes are poured out, and burn him on the wood with fire: where the ashes are poured out shall he be burnt. 4:13 and if the whole congregation of israel sin through ignorance, and the thing be hid from the eyes of the assembly, and they have done somewhat against any of the commandments of the lord concerning things which should not be done, and are guilty; 4:14 when the sin, which they have sinned against it, is known, then the congregation shall offer a young bullock for the sin, and bring him before the tabernacle of the congregation. 4:15 and the elders of the congregation shall lay their hands upon the head of the bullock before the lord: and the bullock shall be killed before the lord. 4:16 and the priest that is anointed shall bring of the bullock’s blood to the tabernacle of the congregation: 4:17 and the priest shall dip his finger in some of the blood, and sprinkle it seven times before the lord, even before the vail. 4:18 and he shall put some of the blood upon the horns of the altar which is before the lord, that is in the tabernacle of the congregation, and shall pour out all the blood at the bottom of the altar of the burnt offering, which is at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. 4:19 and he shall take all his fat from him, and burn it upon the altar. 4:20 and he shall do with the bullock as he did with the bullock for a sin offering, so shall he do with this: and the priest shall make an atonement for them, and it shall be forgiven them. 4:21 and he shall carry forth the bullock without the camp, and burn him as he burned the first bullock: it is a sin offering for the congregation. 4:22 when a ruler hath sinned, and done somewhat through ignorance against any of the commandments of the lord his god concerning things which should not be done, and is guilty; 4:23 or if his sin, wherein he hath sinned, come to his knowledge; he shall bring his offering, a kid of the goats, a male without blemish: 4:24 and he shall lay his hand upon the head of the goat, and kill it in the place where they kill the burnt offering before the lord: it is a sin offering. 4:25 and the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and shall pour out his blood at the bottom of the altar of burnt offering. 4:26 and he shall burn all his fat upon the altar, as the fat of the sacrifice of peace offerings: and the priest shall make an atonement for him as concerning his sin, and it shall be forgiven him. 4:27 and if any one of the common people sin through ignorance, while he doeth somewhat against any of the commandments of the lord concerning things which ought not to be done, and be guilty; 4:28 or if his sin, which he hath sinned, come to his knowledge: then he shall bring his offering, a kid of the goats, a female without blemish, for his sin which he hath sinned. 4:29 and he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin offering, and slay the sin offering in the place of the burnt offering. 4:30 and the priest shall take of the blood thereof with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and shall pour out all the blood thereof at the bottom of the altar. 4:31 and he shall take away all the fat thereof, as the fat is taken away from off the sacrifice of peace offerings; and the priest shall burn it upon the altar for a sweet savour unto the lord; and the priest shall make an atonement for him, and it shall be forgiven him. 4:32 and if he bring a lamb for a sin offering, he shall bring it a female without blemish. 4:33 and he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin offering, and slay it for a sin offering in the place where they kill the burnt offering. 4:34 and the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and shall pour out all the blood thereof at the bottom of the altar: 4:35 and he shall take away all the fat thereof, as the fat of the lamb is taken away from the sacrifice of the peace offerings; and the priest shall burn them upon the altar, according to the offerings made by fire unto the lord: and the priest shall make an atonement for his sin that he hath committed, and it shall be forgiven him. 5:1 and if a soul sin, and hear the voice of swearing, and is a witness, whether he hath seen or known of it; if he do not utter it, then he shall bear his iniquity. 5:2 or if a soul touch any unclean thing, whether it be a carcase of an unclean beast, or a carcase of unclean cattle, or the carcase of unclean creeping things, and if it be hidden from him; he also shall be unclean, and guilty. 5:3 or if he touch the uncleanness of man, whatsoever uncleanness it be that a man shall be defiled withal, and it be hid from him; when he knoweth of it, then he shall be guilty. 5:4 or if a soul swear, pronouncing with his lips to do evil, or to do good, whatsoever it be that a man shall pronounce with an oath, and it be hid from him; when he knoweth of it, then he shall be guilty in one of these. 5:5 and it shall be, when he shall be guilty in one of these things, that he shall confess that he hath sinned in that thing: 5:6 and he shall bring his trespass offering unto the lord for his sin which he hath sinned, a female from the flock, a lamb or a kid of the goats, for a sin offering; and the priest shall make an atonement for him concerning his sin. 5:7 and if he be not able to bring a lamb, then he shall bring for his trespass, which he hath committed, two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, unto the lord; one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering. 5:8 and he shall bring them unto the priest, who shall offer that which is for the sin offering first, and wring off his head from his neck, but shall not divide it asunder: 5:9 and he shall sprinkle of the blood of the sin offering upon the side of the altar; and the rest of the blood shall be wrung out at the bottom of the altar: it is a sin offering. 5:10 and he shall offer the second for a burnt offering, according to the manner: and the priest shall make an atonement for him for his sin which he hath sinned, and it shall be forgiven him. 5:11 but if he be not able to bring two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, then he that sinned shall bring for his offering the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a sin offering; he shall put no oil upon it, neither shall he put any frankincense thereon: for it is a sin offering. 5:12 then shall he bring it to the priest, and the priest shall take his handful of it, even a memorial thereof, and burn it on the altar, according to the offerings made by fire unto the lord: it is a sin offering. 5:13 and the priest shall make an atonement for him as touching his sin that he hath sinned in one of these, and it shall be forgiven him: and the remnant shall be the priest’s, as a meat offering. 5:14 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 5:15 if a soul commit a trespass, and sin through ignorance, in the holy things of the lord; then he shall bring for his trespass unto the lord a ram without blemish out of the flocks, with thy estimation by shekels of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for a trespass offering. 5:16 and he shall make amends for the harm that he hath done in the holy thing, and shall add the fifth part thereto, and give it unto the priest: and the priest shall make an atonement for him with the ram of the trespass offering, and it shall be forgiven him. 5:17 and if a soul sin, and commit any of these things which are forbidden to be done by the commandments of the lord; though he wist it not, yet is he guilty, and shall bear his iniquity. 5:18 and he shall bring a ram without blemish out of the flock, with thy estimation, for a trespass offering, unto the priest: and the priest shall make an atonement for him concerning his ignorance wherein he erred and wist it not, and it shall be forgiven him. 5:19 it is a trespass offering: he hath certainly trespassed against the lord. 6:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:2 if a soul sin, and commit a trespass against the lord, and lie unto his neighbour in that which was delivered him to keep, or in fellowship, or in a thing taken away by violence, or hath deceived his neighbour; 6:3 or have found that which was lost, and lieth concerning it, and sweareth falsely; in any of all these that a man doeth, sinning therein: 6:4 then it shall be, because he hath sinned, and is guilty, that he shall restore that which he took violently away, or the thing which he hath deceitfully gotten, or that which was delivered him to keep, or the lost thing which he found, 6:5 or all that about which he hath sworn falsely; he shall even restore it in the principal, and shall add the fifth part more thereto, and give it unto him to whom it appertaineth, in the day of his trespass offering. 6:6 and he shall bring his trespass offering unto the lord, a ram without blemish out of the flock, with thy estimation, for a trespass offering, unto the priest: 6:7 and the priest shall make an atonement for him before the lord: and it shall be forgiven him for any thing of all that he hath done in trespassing therein. 6:8 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:9 command aaron and his sons, saying, this is the law of the burnt offering: it is the burnt offering, because of the burning upon the altar all night unto the morning, and the fire of the altar shall be burning in it. 6:10 and the priest shall put on his linen garment, and his linen breeches shall he put upon his flesh, and take up the ashes which the fire hath consumed with the burnt offering on the altar, and he shall put them beside the altar. 6:11 and he shall put off his garments, and put on other garments, and carry forth the ashes without the camp unto a clean place. 6:12 and the fire upon the altar shall be burning in it; it shall not be put out: and the priest shall burn wood on it every morning, and lay the burnt offering in order upon it; and he shall burn thereon the fat of the peace offerings. 6:13 the fire shall ever be burning upon the altar; it shall never go out. 6:14 and this is the law of the meat offering: the sons of aaron shall offer it before the lord, before the altar. 6:15 and he shall take of it his handful, of the flour of the meat offering, and of the oil thereof, and all the frankincense which is upon the meat offering, and shall burn it upon the altar for a sweet savour, even the memorial of it, unto the lord. 6:16 and the remainder thereof shall aaron and his sons eat: with unleavened bread shall it be eaten in the holy place; in the court of the tabernacle of the congregation they shall eat it. 6:17 it shall not be baken with leaven. i have given it unto them for their portion of my offerings made by fire; it is most holy, as is the sin offering, and as the trespass offering. 6:18 all the males among the children of aaron shall eat of it. it shall be a statute for ever in your generations concerning the offerings of the lord made by fire: every one that toucheth them shall be holy. 6:19 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:20 this is the offering of aaron and of his sons, which they shall offer unto the lord in the day when he is anointed; the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a meat offering perpetual, half of it in the morning, and half thereof at night. 6:21 in a pan it shall be made with oil; and when it is baken, thou shalt bring it in: and the baken pieces of the meat offering shalt thou offer for a sweet savour unto the lord. 6:22 and the priest of his sons that is anointed in his stead shall offer it: it is a statute for ever unto the lord; it shall be wholly burnt. 6:23 for every meat offering for the priest shall be wholly burnt: it shall not be eaten. 6:24 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:25 speak unto aaron and to his sons, saying, this is the law of the sin offering: in the place where the burnt offering is killed shall the sin offering be killed before the lord: it is most holy. 6:26 the priest that offereth it for sin shall eat it: in the holy place shall it be eaten, in the court of the tabernacle of the congregation. 6:27 whatsoever shall touch the flesh thereof shall be holy: and when there is sprinkled of the blood thereof upon any garment, thou shalt wash that whereon it was sprinkled in the holy place. 6:28 but the earthen vessel wherein it is sodden shall be broken: and if it be sodden in a brasen pot, it shall be both scoured, and rinsed in water. 6:29 all the males among the priests shall eat thereof: it is most holy. 6:30 and no sin offering, whereof any of the blood is brought into the tabernacle of the congregation to reconcile withal in the holy place, shall be eaten: it shall be burnt in the fire. 7:1 likewise this is the law of the trespass offering: it is most holy. 7:2 in the place where they kill the burnt offering shall they kill the trespass offering: and the blood thereof shall he sprinkle round about upon the altar. 7:3 and he shall offer of it all the fat thereof; the rump, and the fat that covereth the inwards, 7:4 and the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the flanks, and the caul that is above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away: 7:5 and the priest shall burn them upon the altar for an offering made by fire unto the lord: it is a trespass offering. 7:6 every male among the priests shall eat thereof: it shall be eaten in the holy place: it is most holy. 7:7 as the sin offering is, so is the trespass offering: there is one law for them: the priest that maketh atonement therewith shall have it. 7:8 and the priest that offereth any man’s burnt offering, even the priest shall have to himself the skin of the burnt offering which he hath offered. 7:9 and all the meat offering that is baken in the oven, and all that is dressed in the fryingpan, and in the pan, shall be the priest’s that offereth it. 7:10 and every meat offering, mingled with oil, and dry, shall all the sons of aaron have, one as much as another. 7:11 and this is the law of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which he shall offer unto the lord. 7:12 if he offer it for a thanksgiving, then he shall offer with the sacrifice of thanksgiving unleavened cakes mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil, and cakes mingled with oil, of fine flour, fried. 7:13 besides the cakes, he shall offer for his offering leavened bread with the sacrifice of thanksgiving of his peace offerings. 7:14 and of it he shall offer one out of the whole oblation for an heave offering unto the lord, and it shall be the priest’s that sprinkleth the blood of the peace offerings. 7:15 and the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings for thanksgiving shall be eaten the same day that it is offered; he shall not leave any of it until the morning. 7:16 but if the sacrifice of his offering be a vow, or a voluntary offering, it shall be eaten the same day that he offereth his sacrifice: and on the morrow also the remainder of it shall be eaten: 7:17 but the remainder of the flesh of the sacrifice on the third day shall be burnt with fire. 7:18 and if any of the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings be eaten at all on the third day, it shall not be accepted, neither shall it be imputed unto him that offereth it: it shall be an abomination, and the soul that eateth of it shall bear his iniquity. 7:19 and the flesh that toucheth any unclean thing shall not be eaten; it shall be burnt with fire: and as for the flesh, all that be clean shall eat thereof. 7:20 but the soul that eateth of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace offerings, that pertain unto the lord, having his uncleanness upon him, even that soul shall be cut off from his people. 7:21 moreover the soul that shall touch any unclean thing, as the uncleanness of man, or any unclean beast, or any abominable unclean thing, and eat of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which pertain unto the lord, even that soul shall be cut off from his people. 7:22 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 7:23 speak unto the children of israel, saying, ye shall eat no manner of fat, of ox, or of sheep, or of goat. 7:24 and the fat of the beast that dieth of itself, and the fat of that which is torn with beasts, may be used in any other use: but ye shall in no wise eat of it. 7:25 for whosoever eateth the fat of the beast, of which men offer an offering made by fire unto the lord, even the soul that eateth it shall be cut off from his people. 7:26 moreover ye shall eat no manner of blood, whether it be of fowl or of beast, in any of your dwellings. 7:27 whatsoever soul it be that eateth any manner of blood, even that soul shall be cut off from his people. 7:28 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 7:29 speak unto the children of israel, saying, he that offereth the sacrifice of his peace offerings unto the lord shall bring his oblation unto the lord of the sacrifice of his peace offerings. 7:30 his own hands shall bring the offerings of the lord made by fire, the fat with the breast, it shall he bring, that the breast may be waved for a wave offering before the lord. 7:31 and the priest shall burn the fat upon the altar: but the breast shall be aaron’s and his sons’. 7:32 and the right shoulder shall ye give unto the priest for an heave offering of the sacrifices of your peace offerings. 7:33 he among the sons of aaron, that offereth the blood of the peace offerings, and the fat, shall have the right shoulder for his part. 7:34 for the wave breast and the heave shoulder have i taken of the children of israel from off the sacrifices of their peace offerings, and have given them unto aaron the priest and unto his sons by a statute for ever from among the children of israel. 7:35 this is the portion of the anointing of aaron, and of the anointing of his sons, out of the offerings of the lord made by fire, in the day when he presented them to minister unto the lord in the priest’s office; 7:36 which the lord commanded to be given them of the c